docs/repository/native-postgresql/usage.adoc, before:

= Using Native PostgreSQL Repository
:page-toc: top
:page-display-order: 1
:page-nav-title: Usage
:page-since: "4.4"

== Overview

To use midPoint with Native PostgreSQL repository you need to:

. Get the midPoint distribution and install it as described xref:/midpoint/install/distribution/[here];
you can stop after unpacking the archive and setting up `MIDPOINT_HOME` environment variable.
. Install and set up the PostgreSQL database - this is the part covered by the bulk of this document.
. Prepare `config.xml` to configure midPoint for the Native repository.
Read xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/configuration/[Repository Configuration] for more information,
including a complete example of `config.xml` for Native repository.
. Finally, you can run midPoint; this is described in the rest of the xref:/midpoint/install/distribution/[installation document] mentioned in the first step.

== Database setup

PostgreSQL versions 13 and newer are supported.
We always recommend using the latest stable version, which as of writing this document is 14.x.

=== Installation and configuration

This guide does not cover the installation process as there are many possible combinations.
To install PG 13 on Ubuntu 20.04 one can use https://gist.github.com/luizomf/1a7994cf4263e10dce416a75b9180f01[these steps] for an inspiration.
Adjust the setup in `pg_hba.conf` to the real IP address of the server.
Setup can be different if PG is used only on localhost, but we assume host-to-host communication
which is typical for production setup.

The short checklist:

* Install PostgreSQL 14 on your OS or server or VM.
* Setup `listen_addresses = '*'` in `postgresql.conf`.
* While in `postgresql.conf` it's also good to add statements statistics extension and query logging
for better visibility (the latter may not be a good option for production and small disks).
See the snippet lower.
* Setup `host...md5` line in `pg_hba.conf`, otherwise you (and JDBC driver) will not be able to
connect to the database remotely.
* Restart PostgreSQL.

==== postgresql.conf

In short, this can all be added to the end `postgresql.conf`:

----
listen_addresses = '*'

# this is necessary for pg_stat_statements extension
shared_preload_libraries = 'pg_stat_statements'

# To log all queries, uncomment the lines below.
# Monitor the free disk space afterwards, there is no automatic cleanup!
#log_directory = 'pg_log'
#log_filename = 'postgresql-%Y-%m-%d_%H%M%S.log'
#log_statement = 'all'
#logging_collector = on
----

[NOTE]
Sizing the database server and adjust PostgreSQL configuration parameters is not part
of this document at this moment - but we plan to add it.
In the meantime rely on other online resources.
Be aware that the default Postgres server sizing is rather small.
You can use a configuration calculator like https://pgtune.leopard.in.ua/[this] to get reasonable
defaults if you know the DB hardware (use "Mixed type of application" as DB type).

For more information regarding this configuration file read https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/config-setting.html[this document] from official PostgreSQL documentation.

==== pg_hba.conf

To make things simple, we will allow all connections to the database; password is still required.
Add the following lines at the end of the `pg_hba.conf` file:

----
# Allow connections from outside (with password)
host    all             all             0.0.0.0/0            md5
----

For more information regarding this configuration file read the https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/auth-pg-hba-conf.html[official documentation].

==== Restart the server

Any chanes to `postgresql.conf` or `pg_hba.conf` requires PostgreSQL server restart.
Do so now to apply the configration changes.

=== Database preparation

[WARNING]
Don't use https://www.pgadmin.org/[pgAdmin] for midPoint SQL scripts!
Explanation is in one of the important blocks below.

Assuming we start in `bash` as a root or sudo capable user, let's first run `psql` as database admin:

[source,bash]
----
sudo -i -u postgres psql
----

Next we will create a user and a database for midPoint.
In the following example, we create `midpoint` user as database superuser.
If you require non-superuser, follow link:#installing-as-non-superuser[this section] instead.

[source,sql]
----
CREATE USER midpoint WITH PASSWORD 'password' LOGIN SUPERUSER;
CREATE DATABASE midpoint WITH OWNER = midpoint ENCODING = 'UTF8' TABLESPACE = pg_default LC_COLLATE = 'en_US.UTF-8' LC_CTYPE = 'en_US.UTF-8' CONNECTION LIMIT = -1;
----

To initialize the database connect to `midpoint` database as `midpoint` user and execute
the content of the following schema files provided with the distribution package
under the `doc/config/sql/native-new` directory:

* `postgres-new.sql` is the content of the main repository schema without audit tables.
This file also creates `public` schema if missing - dropping the whole `public` schema is often
the fastest way to replace any previous schema (obviously, not recommended for production).
* `postgres-new-audit.sql` is the content of audit schema.
It can be applied on top of the main repository schema or separately to another database.
If both schemas are to be applied, first apply main repository schema followed by audit schema.
* `postgres-new-quartz.sql` is the script with tables necessary for midPoint scheduler (using
http://www.quartz-scheduler.org/[Quartz Schduler]).
These tables are optional, but it is recommended to create them in case you need them.
The tables must be created in the main repository schema.

See xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-audit[Native PostgreSQL Audit Trail] for details how
to set it up in a database xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-audit/#sql-audit-using-its-own-database[separate from the main repository].
Be aware that with new repository *both databases have to be PostgreSQL databases.*
It is possible to use different versions for each database as long as they are supported (13 or higher).

[IMPORTANT]
If you want to migrate your old audit records to the new database and keep event record IDs unique,
set the ID sequence in the new database as described in xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-audit/#audit-migration-from-other-database[Audit migration from other database].

We recommend using `psql` for database initialization like this:

----
export PGPASSWORD=password # password for psql, you can skip it and enter it interactively
# If you want to replace any previous tables in the schema, uncomment this drop too:
#psql -h localhost -d midpoint -U midpoint -c "drop schema public cascade"
psql -h localhost -d midpoint -U midpoint -f postgres-new.sql -f postgres-new-audit.sql -f postgres-new-quartz.sql
----

If you want to use different schema name than `public` you have to adjust the initialization commands.

.Prefer psql command
[IMPORTANT]
====
You can use other client than `psql`, but the client must send the commands to the server separately.
E.g. IDEA Ultimate Edition or DataGrip from JetBrains work fine.

Some clients, notably https://www.pgadmin.org/[pgAdmin], send the whole content in a single request.
This does not go well with midPoint initalization script that calls procedure with `COMMIT` inside.
You can execute `call` statements separately, but the same problem occurs for upgrade scripts
where you'd need to execute each `call` separately.

Alternatively, it seems that wrapping the content of the file with an https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-do.html[anonymous block]
works, but we still recommend using tools that can execute files properly - that is `psql`.
====

.Quartz tables
[NOTE]
====
Quartz scheduler in midPoint can be configured to use a database with `taskManager/jdbcJobStore`
option in `config.xml` set to `true`.
This is also the default if `clustered` is set to `true`.
See xref:/midpoint/reference/tasks/task-manager/configuration/[Task Manager Configuration]
for further details.

Even if not required, it is best to create these tables in case the scheduler configuration changes later.
====

If you plan to use https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/pgstatstatements.html[statement statistics extension]
(not discussed here), initialize it like this:

----
psql -h localhost -d midpoint -U midpoint -c "create extension pg_stat_statements"
----

=== Installing As Non-Superuser

The instruction above assume that database user `midpoint` is a database superuser.
This is a very convenient method.
However, it is likely to be a security concern, especially in case that midPoint is sharing database engine with other applications.
Following steps describe the process of database initialization without granting superuser privileges to midPoint user.

. Connect to `psql` utility as superuser (`postgres`).
Execute following commands.

. Create user without superuser privileges:
+
[source,sql]
----
CREATE USER midpoint WITH PASSWORD 'password' LOGIN NOSUPERUSER NOCREATEDB NOCREATEROLE;
----
+
Or alternatively use `createuser` utility:
+
[source,bash]
----
sudo -u postgres createuser --pwprompt --no-superuser --no-createdb --no-createrole midpoint
----

. Create `midpoint` database with `midpoint` user as an owner:
+
[source,sql]
----
CREATE DATABASE midpoint WITH OWNER = midpoint ENCODING = 'UTF8' TABLESPACE = pg_default LC_COLLATE = 'en_US.UTF-8' LC_CTYPE = 'en_US.UTF-8' CONNECTION LIMIT = -1;
----

. As database superuser (`postgres`) connect to the new database:
+
[source,sql]
----
\c midpoint
----

. Execute the commands that create database extensions. Such commands require superuser privileges:
+
[source,sql]
----
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS intarray;
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS pg_trgm;
DO $$
BEGIN
    PERFORM pg_get_functiondef('gen_random_uuid()'::regprocedure);
    RAISE NOTICE 'gen_random_uuid already exists, skipping create EXTENSION pgcrypto';
EXCEPTION WHEN undefined_function THEN
    CREATE EXTENSION pgcrypto;
END
$$;
----

. Run the rest of the SQL script as user `midpoint`:
+
[source,bash]
----
psql -h localhost -d midpoint -U midpoint -f doc/config/sql/native-new/postgres-new.sql
----
+
There may be errors indicating problems with creating database extensions, caused by the script attempting to execute a privileged operation.
You can ignore such errors, as the extensions were created by superuser in previous step.

. Continue installation process normally, which means executing the audit SQL script `postgres-new-audit.sql`
and script for Quartz tables `postgres-new-quartz.sql`.

== midPoint Configuration

At this moment the database is prepared and it's time to configure midPoint appropriately.
This typically preparing proper repository configuration in `config.xml` file.
Configuration options related to repository as well as an example of `config.xml` file can be found
in xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/configuration/[Repository Configuration] article.
The article references this page, but if you finished the steps above in this document, you can focus just on the config options.

With the database ready and midPoint configuration file referencing the Native repository,
you can finally run midPoint, e.g. by running `bin/start.sh`.
More details on running midPoint are mentioned in the xref:/midpoint/install/distribution/[installation document].

== Versioning and upgrading

Long story short, just run the provided `postgres-new-upgrade.sql` anytime, it should be safe.
It always runs only the missing parts of the upgrade process.
Be sure you're running the upgrade script provided with the version you're actually using, see
xref:/midpoint/reference/upgrade/database-schema-upgrade/#upgrading-native-postgresql-repository[database schema upgrade].

You can find further details in the source code documentation for `apply_change` procedure at the end of the `postgres-new.sql` script.

== Troubleshooting

If you find a bug or encounter performance problem with the Native repository,
it is always important to gather more information before reporting the issue.

* In case of error or exception, always include the relevant portion of the xref:/midpoint/reference/diag/logging/[midpoint.log] in the report.
* Review xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/db-maintenance/#index-tuning[Index tuning]
tips for performance problems, especially for extension items or shadow attributes.
* If the performance problem is indeed DB related, identify the slow query, preferably using
`pg_stat_statements` extension as xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/db-maintenance/#monitoring-queries[described here].
* To log issued SQL queries in xref:/midpoint/reference/diag/logging/[midpoint.log],
configure system loggers (*System* in main menu, then *Logging*) so that it contains
`com.evolveum.midpoint.repo.sqlbase.querydsl.SqlLogger` with level `DEBUG` (shows SQL)
or `TRACE` (includes parameter values).

== See also

* xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/repository-database-support/[Repository Database Support]
discusses old and new repository and our support strategy.
* xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/migration/[Migration to Native PostgreSQL Repository]
* xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/configuration/[Repository Configuration]
* xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-audit/[Native PostgreSQL Audit Trail]
* xref:/midpoint/reference/tasks/task-manager/configuration/[Task Manager Configuration]

Commit message:

Native repo notes: non-superuser upgrade problems, new DB collation

docs/repository/native-postgresql/usage.adoc, after:

= Using Native PostgreSQL Repository
:page-toc: top
:page-display-order: 1
:page-nav-title: Usage
:page-since: "4.4"

== Overview

To use midPoint with Native PostgreSQL repository you need to:

. Get the midPoint distribution and install it as described xref:/midpoint/install/distribution/[here];
you can stop after unpacking the archive and setting up `MIDPOINT_HOME` environment variable.
. Install and set up the PostgreSQL database - this is the part covered by the bulk of this document.
. Prepare `config.xml` to configure midPoint for the Native repository.
Read xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/configuration/[Repository Configuration] for more information,
including a complete example of `config.xml` for Native repository.
. Finally, you can run midPoint; this is described in the rest of the xref:/midpoint/install/distribution/[installation document] mentioned in the first step.

== Database setup

PostgreSQL versions 13 and newer are supported.
We always recommend using the latest stable version, which as of writing this document is 14.x.

=== Installation and configuration

This guide does not cover the installation process as there are many possible combinations.
To install PG 13 on Ubuntu 20.04 one can use https://gist.github.com/luizomf/1a7994cf4263e10dce416a75b9180f01[these steps] for an inspiration.
Adjust the setup in `pg_hba.conf` to the real IP address of the server.
Setup can be different if PG is used only on localhost, but we assume host-to-host communication
which is typical for production setup.

The short checklist:

* Install PostgreSQL 14 on your OS or server or VM.
* Setup `listen_addresses = '*'` in `postgresql.conf`.
* While in `postgresql.conf` it's also good to add statements statistics extension and query logging
for better visibility (the latter may not be a good option for production and small disks).
See the snippet lower.
* Setup `host...md5` line in `pg_hba.conf`, otherwise you (and JDBC driver) will not be able to
connect to the database remotely.
* Restart PostgreSQL.

==== postgresql.conf

In short, this can all be added to the end `postgresql.conf`:

----
listen_addresses = '*'

# this is necessary for pg_stat_statements extension
shared_preload_libraries = 'pg_stat_statements'

# To log all queries, uncomment the lines below.
# Monitor the free disk space afterwards, there is no automatic cleanup!
#log_directory = 'pg_log'
#log_filename = 'postgresql-%Y-%m-%d_%H%M%S.log'
#log_statement = 'all'
#logging_collector = on
----

[NOTE]
Sizing the database server and adjust PostgreSQL configuration parameters is not part
of this document at this moment - but we plan to add it.
In the meantime rely on other online resources.
Be aware that the default Postgres server sizing is rather small.
You can use a configuration calculator like https://pgtune.leopard.in.ua/[this] to get reasonable
defaults if you know the DB hardware (use "Mixed type of application" as DB type).

For more information regarding this configuration file read https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/config-setting.html[this document] from official PostgreSQL documentation.

==== pg_hba.conf

To make things simple, we will allow all connections to the database; password is still required.
Add the following lines at the end of the `pg_hba.conf` file:

----
# Allow connections from outside (with password)
host    all             all             0.0.0.0/0            md5
----

For more information regarding this configuration file read the https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/auth-pg-hba-conf.html[official documentation].

==== Restart the server

Any chanes to `postgresql.conf` or `pg_hba.conf` requires PostgreSQL server restart.
Do so now to apply the configration changes.

=== Database preparation

[WARNING]
*Don't use https://www.pgadmin.org/[pgAdmin] for midPoint SQL scripts!*
Explanation is in one of the important blocks below.

Assuming we start in `bash` as a root or sudo capable user, let's first run `psql` as database admin:

[source,bash]
----
sudo -i -u postgres psql
----

Next we will create a user and a database for midPoint.
In the following example, we create `midpoint` user as database superuser.
If you require non-superuser, follow link:#installing-as-non-superuser[this section] instead.

[source,sql]
----
CREATE USER midpoint WITH PASSWORD 'password' LOGIN SUPERUSER;
CREATE DATABASE midpoint WITH OWNER = midpoint ENCODING = 'UTF8' TABLESPACE = pg_default LC_COLLATE = 'en_US.UTF-8' LC_CTYPE = 'en_US.UTF-8' CONNECTION LIMIT = -1;
----

[NOTE]
====
The command above may complain about the collation on some platforms:

----
[22023] ERROR: new collation (en_US.UTF-8) is incompatible with the collation of the template database (en_US.utf8)
Hint: Use the same collation as in the template database, or use template0 as template.
----

You can either add suggested `TEMPLATE template0` to the command, or use `en_US.utf8` locale instead
of `en_US.UTF-8`.
====

To initialize the database connect to `midpoint` database as `midpoint` user and execute
the content of the following schema files provided with the distribution package
under the `doc/config/sql/native-new` directory:

* `postgres-new.sql` is the content of the main repository schema without audit tables.
This file also creates `public` schema if missing - dropping the whole `public` schema is often
the fastest way to replace any previous schema (obviously, not recommended for production).
* `postgres-new-audit.sql` is the content of audit schema.
It can be applied on top of the main repository schema or separately to another database.
If both schemas are to be applied, first apply main repository schema followed by audit schema.
* `postgres-new-quartz.sql` is the script with tables necessary for midPoint scheduler (using
http://www.quartz-scheduler.org/[Quartz Schduler]).
These tables are optional, but it is recommended to create them in case you need them.
The tables must be created in the main repository schema.

See xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-audit[Native PostgreSQL Audit Trail] for details how
to set it up in a database xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-audit/#sql-audit-using-its-own-database[separate from the main repository].
Be aware that with new repository *both databases have to be PostgreSQL databases.*
It is possible to use different versions for each database as long as they are supported (13 or higher).

[IMPORTANT]
If you want to migrate your old audit records to the new database and keep event record IDs unique,
set the ID sequence in the new database as described in xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-audit/#audit-migration-from-other-database[Audit migration from other database].

We recommend using `psql` for database initialization like this:

----
export PGPASSWORD=password # password for psql, you can skip it and enter it interactively
# If you want to replace any previous tables in the schema, uncomment this drop too:
#psql -h localhost -d midpoint -U midpoint -c "drop schema public cascade"
psql -h localhost -d midpoint -U midpoint -f postgres-new.sql -f postgres-new-audit.sql -f postgres-new-quartz.sql
----

If you want to use different schema name than `public` you have to adjust the initialization commands.

.Prefer psql command
[IMPORTANT]
====
You can use other client than `psql`, but the client must send the commands to the server separately.
E.g. IDEA Ultimate Edition or DataGrip from JetBrains work fine.

Some clients, notably https://www.pgadmin.org/[pgAdmin], send the whole content in a single request.
This does not go well with midPoint initalization script that calls procedure with `COMMIT` inside.
You can execute `call` statements separately, but the same problem occurs for upgrade scripts
where you'd need to execute each `call` separately.

Alternatively, it seems that wrapping the content of the file with an https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-do.html[anonymous block]
works, but we still recommend using tools that can execute files properly - that is `psql`.
====

.Quartz tables
[NOTE]
====
Quartz scheduler in midPoint can be configured to use a database with `taskManager/jdbcJobStore`
option in `config.xml` set to `true`.
This is also the default if `clustered` is set to `true`.
See xref:/midpoint/reference/tasks/task-manager/configuration/[Task Manager Configuration]
for further details.

Even if not required, it is best to create these tables in case the scheduler configuration changes later.
====

If you plan to use https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/pgstatstatements.html[statement statistics extension]
(not discussed here), initialize it like this:

----
psql -h localhost -d midpoint -U midpoint -c "create extension pg_stat_statements"
----

=== Installing As Non-Superuser

The instruction above assume that database user `midpoint` is a database superuser.
This is a very convenient method.
However, it is likely to be a security concern, especially in case that midPoint is sharing database engine with other applications.
Following steps describe the process of database initialization without granting superuser privileges to midPoint user.

. Connect to `psql` utility as superuser (`postgres`).
Execute following commands.

. Create user without superuser privileges:
+
[source,sql]
----
CREATE USER midpoint WITH PASSWORD 'password' LOGIN NOSUPERUSER NOCREATEDB NOCREATEROLE;
----
+
Or alternatively use `createuser` utility:
+
[source,bash]
----
sudo -u postgres createuser --pwprompt --no-superuser --no-createdb --no-createrole midpoint
----

. Create `midpoint` database with `midpoint` user as an owner:
+
[source,sql]
----
CREATE DATABASE midpoint WITH OWNER = midpoint ENCODING = 'UTF8' TABLESPACE = pg_default LC_COLLATE = 'en_US.UTF-8' LC_CTYPE = 'en_US.UTF-8' CONNECTION LIMIT = -1;
----

. As database superuser (`postgres`) connect to the new database:
+
[source,sql]
----
\c midpoint
----

. Execute the commands that create database extensions. Such commands require superuser privileges:
+
[source,sql]
----
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS intarray;
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS pg_trgm;
DO $$
BEGIN
    PERFORM pg_get_functiondef('gen_random_uuid()'::regprocedure);
    RAISE NOTICE 'gen_random_uuid already exists, skipping create EXTENSION pgcrypto';
EXCEPTION WHEN undefined_function THEN
    CREATE EXTENSION pgcrypto;
END
$$;
----
+
Check the create script for all occurrenes of `CREATE EXTENSION` and run them manually.

. Run the rest of the SQL script as user `midpoint`:
+
[source,bash]
----
psql -h localhost -d midpoint -U midpoint -f doc/config/sql/native-new/postgres-new.sql
----
+
There may be errors indicating problems with creating database extensions, caused by the script attempting to execute a privileged operation.
You can ignore such errors, as the extensions were created by superuser in previous step.

. Continue installation process normally, which means executing the audit SQL script `postgres-new-audit.sql`
and script for Quartz tables `postgres-new-quartz.sql`.

[WARNING]
With this setup you have to be careful with upgrade scripts as well.
*Always check the upgrade SQL script for new `CREATE EXTENSION` and run those as superuser first!*
Afterwards, you can run the whole upgrade script as the normal user (`midpoint` in this example).

== midPoint Configuration

At this moment the database is prepared and it's time to configure midPoint appropriately.
This typically preparing proper repository configuration in `config.xml` file.
Configuration options related to repository as well as an example of `config.xml` file can be found
in xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/configuration/[Repository Configuration] article.
The article references this page, but if you finished the steps above in this document, you can focus just on the config options.

With the database ready and midPoint configuration file referencing the Native repository,
you can finally run midPoint, e.g. by running `bin/start.sh`.
More details on running midPoint are mentioned in the xref:/midpoint/install/distribution/[installation document].

== Versioning and upgrading

Long story short, just run the provided `postgres-new-upgrade.sql` anytime, it should be safe.
It always runs only the missing parts of the upgrade process.
Be sure you're running the upgrade script provided with the version you're actually using, see
xref:/midpoint/reference/upgrade/database-schema-upgrade/#upgrading-native-postgresql-repository[database schema upgrade].

You can find further details in the source code documentation for `apply_change` procedure at the end of the `postgres-new.sql` script.

== Troubleshooting

If you find a bug or encounter performance problem with the Native repository,
it is always important to gather more information before reporting the issue.

* In case of error or exception, always include the relevant portion of the xref:/midpoint/reference/diag/logging/[midpoint.log] in the report.
* Review xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/db-maintenance/#index-tuning[Index tuning]
tips for performance problems, especially for extension items or shadow attributes.
* If the performance problem is indeed DB related, identify the slow query, preferably using
`pg_stat_statements` extension as xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/db-maintenance/#monitoring-queries[described here].
* To log issued SQL queries in xref:/midpoint/reference/diag/logging/[midpoint.log],
configure system loggers (*System* in main menu, then *Logging*) so that it contains
`com.evolveum.midpoint.repo.sqlbase.querydsl.SqlLogger` with level `DEBUG` (shows SQL)
or `TRACE` (includes parameter values).

== See also

* xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/repository-database-support/[Repository Database Support]
discusses old and new repository and our support strategy.
* xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/migration/[Migration to Native PostgreSQL Repository]
* xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/configuration/[Repository Configuration]
* xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-audit/[Native PostgreSQL Audit Trail]
* xref:/midpoint/reference/tasks/task-manager/configuration/[Task Manager Configuration]
