docs/simulation/index.adoc, before:

= Simulations
:page-toc: top
:page-since: "4.7"
:page-midpoint-feature: true
:page-alias: { "parent" : "/midpoint/features/current/" }
:page-upkeep-status: green

== Introduction

The "simulation" is an umbrella term covering various mechanisms of "what-if" analysis in midPoint.
It could be characterized as an ability to see expected effects of some actions without the risk of damaging the system state.

Let us introduce few basic terms first: execution mode and configuration used.

. _Execution mode_ determines whether any actions carried out by an activity will have persistent effects or not.
. _Configuration used_ tells whether the activity should use "production" or "development" configuration.

.Execution modes and system configurations
image::mode-config-matrix.drawio.png[Mode-config matrix]

Let us describe these concepts in more details.

== Persistent-Effects vs Simulation Execution Mode

Any xref:/midpoint/reference/tasks/activities/[activity] in midPoint can execute in two basic modes: _persistent-effects_ or _simulation_.

=== Persistent-Effects Mode

This is the standard mode of operation, where any actions are really executed, be they in the midPoint repository or on the resources.
All such changes are also recorded in the system audit log.

[NOTE]
====
There are some specialties like postponing resource operations either because of the resource unavailability (planned - see xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/maintenance-state/[maintenance mode] - or unplanned), or because of xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/propagation/[provisioning propagation].
But none of these contradict the basic idea that all computed operations are going to be (eventually) applied.
====

[NOTE]
====
This mode can be sometimes (imprecisely) called _production_.
But this term conflicts with the one of <<Production Configuration>>, so it should not be used.

Overall, the "persistent-effects mode" term is not ideal either.
We are looking for a better one.
====

=== Simulation Mode

Here, no actions that could have persistent externally visible effects are executed.
Accordingly, nothing is written to the system audit log.

The changes are computed, just like in <<Persistent-Effects Mode>>, but instead of their application, they are written to so-called xref:/midpoint/reference/simulation/results/[simulation result].
It is a special kind of object in the midPoint repository, collecting both statistical and detailed information about changes that would be applied.

== Production vs Development Configuration

=== Production Configuration

The production configuration comprises all configuration items that are engaged in regular midPoint operations.
By _configuration item_, we mean, for example, a definition of resource, resource object type, attribute, association, abstract role, assignment, or mapping.

Items in the production configuration are the only ones that can cause persistent effects.
(See <<Persistent-Effects Mode>>.)

=== Development Configuration

Development configuration represents the part of the system configuration that is currently being developed.
With regard to the production configuration, some items may be added, some replaced, and finally, some may be missing.

The development configuration cannot be executed in "persistent-effects" mode.

Before 4.7, the development configuration had to reside in a separate midPoint instance, typically called the "development" or "testing" one.
Although such an approach still has its advantages, it is now possible for both configurations to share a single midPoint instance.

=== Distinguishing Production and Development Configurations

This distinction is currently made using the `lifecycleState` property on configuration items.

.Lifecycle states and configurations
image::lifecycle-states.drawio.png[Lifecycle States]

.Mapping of item's lifecycle state to configuration set membership
[%autowidth]
[%header]
|===
| Lifecycle state | Production Configuration | Development Configuration
| `active` or missing | yes | yes
| `proposed` | no | yes
| `deprecated` | yes | no
| other | no | no
|===

Lifecycle state is currently supported on the following configuration items:

- resource,
- resource object class,
- resource object type,
- resource object attribute,
- resource object association,
- synchronization reaction,
- abstract roles (role, org, service, archetype),
- assignment,
- object template,
- mapping.

NOTE: For short, we will sometimes use the statement "configuration item (like a resource) is in development mode" to denote the fact that the item is part of the development configuration but not present in the production one.
On the other hand, when we say that "item is in production mode", we mean that it is a part of the production configuration without saying anything about whether it is also part of the development configuration.

=== Examples

==== Resource in Development Configuration Only

The following resource is in development configuration only.

.Listing 1: Example of a resource in development configuration only
[source,xml]
----
<resource xmlns="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3">
    <name>CSV resource</name>
    <!-- ... -->
    <lifecycleState>proposed</lifecycleState>
    <!-- ... -->
</resource>
----

This setting guarantees that the content of the real resource will not be touched by midPoint.
All operations that could affect this resource could only be simulated.

==== Replacing a Mapping in an Object Template

The following setup can be used to preview a migration from old to new organizational unit by switching mappings in an object template.

.Listing 2: Example of switching mappings in an object template
[source,xml]
----
<objectTemplate xmlns="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3">
    <name>person-template</name>
    <mapping> <!--1-->
        <strength>strong</strength>
        <expression>
            <value>ACME</value>
        </expression>
        <target>
            <path>organization</path>
        </target>
    </mapping>
    <mapping>
        <lifecycleState>deprecated</lifecycleState> <!--2-->
        <strength>strong</strength>
        <expression>
            <value>old-unit</value>
        </expression>
        <target>
            <path>organizationalUnit</path>
        </target>
    </mapping>
    <mapping>
        <lifecycleState>proposed</lifecycleState> <!--3-->
        <strength>strong</strength>
        <expression>
            <value>new-unit</value>
        </expression>
        <target>
            <path>organizationalUnit</path>
        </target>
    </mapping>
</objectTemplate>
----
<1> No explicit lifecycle state means "active".
Hence, this mapping is part of both production and development configurations.
<2> The `deprecated` state means that this mapping belongs only to the production configuration.
<3> The `proposed` state means that this mapping belongs only to the development configuration.

The third mapping serves as a replacement for the second one in the development configuration.
Hence, when you run a persistent-effect activity (or a simulation using production configuration), users are assigned to `old-unit`.
But when running a simulation using the development configuration, the users are assigned to `new-unit` instead.

== Typical Simulation Scenarios

This section presents a couple of typical simulation-related scenarios.

NOTE: Please see the xref:/midpoint/reference/simulation/tutorial/[tutorial] where these scenarios are shown in more detail.

=== Introduction of a New Resource Configuration

When connecting a new source or target system to midPoint, we must create its resource definition.
However, the first version of the definition is rarely completely correct, and usually there is a need to fine-tune it.
MidPoint supports this by allowing us to evolve the definition safely in development mode so that potential mistakes will not cause any harm to production data in midPoint or on resources.

Processes directly supported in this area include:

- classification of resource objects (e.g., accounts) into object types, like `account/default` or `account/person`;
- correlation of resource objects to so-called focus objects, like users, roles, and so on;
- mapping of data between resource objects and focus objects.

=== Evolution of a Resource Configuration

Eventually, the first version of resource configuration is completed and put into production use.
Sooner or later, requirements for its evolution will emerge.
The simulations feature supports such evolution by allowing adding pieces of the configuration (like new object types, attributes, associations, or mappings) first in the development mode and, after they have been developed and tested enough, switching them into production.
Also, other items can be replaced by marking them as deprecated and adding analogous proposed items.
Yet other items can be deprecated without replacement, effectively planning for their removal.

== Specific Functionality
// TODO better name

=== Switching Between Production and Development Mode

Various configuration items (such as a resource) can be switched between production and development mode using a button in the GUI.
An example is shown in Figure 3.

.Switching between production and development mode for a resource
image::production-development-mode.png[Switching between production and development mode for a resource, width=750]

=== Running the Simulation on Foreground

Simulation results and related objects can be displayed via the midPoint GUI.
For more information, please see xref:../admin-gui/simulations.adoc#_running_the_simulation_on_foreground[Simulations UI].

=== Running the Simulation on Background

The simulations are typically executed in background tasks that host individual xref:/midpoint/reference/tasks/activities/[activities].
There are three aspects that can be defined:

==== Execution Mode

An activity can be run in one of three basic modes:

1. *Full execution.*
All computed changes are applied; everything has persistent effects.
This is the <<Persistent-Effects Mode>> described in the introduction.

2. *Simulation (or preview).*
Changes to the data (user properties, account attributes, and so on) are only simulated; nothing is really changed in midPoint or on resources.
This is the <<Simulation Mode>> described in the introduction.footnote:[Simulation and preview are used as synonyms.]

3. *Shadow management simulation (or preview).*
This is a special low-level simulation of shadow-management-related changes that are normally applied automatically.
Those changes are related to shadow _classification_, i.e., determining its kind and intent, and shadow _correlation_, i.e., determining its owner.
In modes 1 and 2, such changes are applied automatically because they have no visible effects on the identity data.
However, we may preview even those changes to make the development of classification and correlation configuration easier.
This is xref:/midpoint/versioning/experimental/[experimental functionality].
Please see the xref:/midpoint/reference/simulation/tutorial/[tutorial] for an example.

This configuration is driven by the `execution/mode` parameter in the activity definition.

For more information, please see the xref:/midpoint/reference/tasks/activities/execution-mode.adoc[activity execution mode specification].

==== Configuration Used

An activity can execute against <<Production Configuration>> or <<Development Configuration>>.
(The latter cannot be used in <<Persistent-Effects Mode>>.)

This configuration is driven by `execution/configurationToUse` parameter in the activity definition.

For more information, please see xref:/midpoint/reference/tasks/activities/execution-mode.adoc[activity execution mode specification].

==== Simulation Result

We can run the simulation with or without creating the simulation result.
Furthermore, there are various options connected with the result itself, such as what metrics and event marks we should include in the result.

This configuration is driven by the `reporting/simulationResult` parameter in the activity definition.

For more information, please see <<Configuring Simulation Results>> and xref:/midpoint/reference/tasks/activities/reporting/simulation-result.adoc[activity simulation result definition].

==== An Example

.Listing 3. An import task executing in simulation mode, over development configuration, and with creation of a simulation result
[source,xml]
----
<task xmlns="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3"
      xmlns:ri="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/resource/instance-3"
      oid="8b169df3-3124-4e36-871f-83bb52acfd7b">
    <name>Simulated import from HR</name>
    <executionState>runnable</executionState>
    <activity>
        <work>
            <import>
                <resourceObjects>
                    <resourceRef oid="236dd5ca-47df-403c-82e1-9ce2f36be000"/>
                    <objectclass>ri:AccountObjectClass</objectclass>
                </resourceObjects>
            </import>
        </work>
        <execution>
            <mode>preview</mode> <!--1-->
            <configurationToUse>
                <set>development</set> <!--2-->
            </configurationToUse>
        </execution>
        <reporting>
            <simulationResult/> <!--3-->
        </reporting>
    </activity>
</task>
----
<1> The value of `preview` means we do not want to execute the actions in this task.
<2> `development` means we want to use the development configuration in this task.
<3> The presence of `simulationResult` means we want to create the simulation result object.

=== Displaying and Managing the Simulation Results

Simulation results and related objects can be displayed via midPoint GUI.
For more information, please see xref:../admin-gui/simulations.adoc[Simulations UI].

=== Configuring Simulation Results

Simulation results are configured in the system configuration and in individual simulation activities.
Aspects that are configured include:

- What metrics and event marks should be observed during the particular simulation?
- Should a dedicated database partition be used for storing this simulation result?

Please see xref:results/definition.adoc[] for more information.

=== Reporting

Simulation results can be displayed interactively via the midPoint GUI, or their content can be exported using the xref:/midpoint/reference/misc/reports/configuration/[reporting] functionality.

There are the following built-in simulation reports.

.Built-in simulation reports
[%autowidth]
|===
| Report | Description | Typical use

| xref:reports/results.adoc[]
| Lists simulation results without having a look at individual processed objects.
Shows metadata and individual metrics.
| overview, trends

| xref:reports/objects.adoc[]
| Lists objects processed by a given simulation.
One processed object corresponds to one report row.
| high-level view of one simulation

| xref:reports/objects-with-metrics.adoc[]
| Lists objects processed by a given simulation along with metrics related to each object.
| more detailed quantitative analysis of the simulation

| xref:reports/items-changed.adoc[]
| Lists items changed within individual processed objects.
| changes of items, suitable especially for single-valued ones

| xref:reports/values-changed.adoc[]
| Lists values added or deleted within individual items in processed objects.
| changes of items, suitable especially for multivalued ones with a larger number of values
|===

// === Application Programming Interface
// #TODO#

// === Configuring Lifecycle State
// #TODO#

== Limitations

#TODO#

. Errors during pre-clockwork stage are not captured
. Shadows that do not enter clockwork stage are not captured
. "Clockwork view" ~ provisioning-level operations are not captured (just like in audit)

=== Shadow Management Simulations

. This is an experimental feature.
. There are often two records for each processed shadow: one for classification, one for correlation.
. In this mode, higher-level processing (synchronization) is always skipped.
. Errors are not reported in this mode.
They can not be seen in the simulation result, only in the respective task.

Commit message:

Update simulations docs
Mainly concerning limitations.

docs/simulation/index.adoc, after:

= Simulations
:page-toc: top
:page-since: "4.7"
:page-midpoint-feature: true
:page-alias: { "parent" : "/midpoint/features/current/" }
:page-upkeep-status: green

== Introduction

The "simulation" is an umbrella term covering various mechanisms of "what-if" analysis in midPoint.
It could be characterized as an ability to see expected effects of some actions without the risk of damaging the system state.

Let us introduce few basic terms first: execution mode and configuration used.

. _Execution mode_ determines whether any actions carried out by an activity will have persistent effects or not.
. _Configuration used_ tells whether the activity should use "production" or "development" configuration.

.Execution modes and system configurations
image::mode-config-matrix.drawio.png[Mode-config matrix]

Let us describe these concepts in more details.

== Persistent-Effects vs Simulation Execution Mode

Any xref:/midpoint/reference/tasks/activities/[activity] in midPoint can execute in two basic modes: _persistent-effects_ or _simulation_.

=== Persistent-Effects Mode

This is the standard mode of operation, where any actions are really executed, be they in the midPoint repository or on the resources.
All such changes are also recorded in the system audit log.

[NOTE]
====
There are some specialties like postponing resource operations either because of the resource unavailability (planned - see xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/maintenance-state/[maintenance mode] - or unplanned), or because of xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/propagation/[provisioning propagation].
But none of these contradict the basic idea that all computed operations are going to be (eventually) applied.
====

[NOTE]
====
This mode can be sometimes (imprecisely) called _production_.
But this term conflicts with the one of <<Production Configuration>>, so it should not be used.

Overall, the "persistent-effects mode" term is not ideal either.
We are looking for a better one.
====

=== Simulation Mode

Here, no actions that could have persistent externally visible effects are executed.
Accordingly, nothing is written to the system audit log.

The changes are computed, just like in <<Persistent-Effects Mode>>, but instead of their application, they are written to so-called xref:/midpoint/reference/simulation/results/[simulation result].
It is a special kind of object in the midPoint repository, collecting both statistical and detailed information about changes that would be applied.

== Production vs Development Configuration

=== Production Configuration

The production configuration comprises all configuration items that are engaged in regular midPoint operations.
By _configuration item_, we mean, for example, a definition of resource, resource object type, attribute, association, abstract role, assignment, or mapping.

Items in the production configuration are the only ones that can cause persistent effects.
(See <<Persistent-Effects Mode>>.)

=== Development Configuration

Development configuration represents the part of the system configuration that is currently being developed.
With regard to the production configuration, some items may be added, some replaced, and finally, some may be missing.

The development configuration cannot be executed in "persistent-effects" mode.

Before 4.7, the development configuration had to reside in a separate midPoint instance, typically called the "development" or "testing" one.
Although such an approach still has its advantages, it is now possible for both configurations to share a single midPoint instance.

=== Distinguishing Production and Development Configurations

This distinction is currently made using the `lifecycleState` property on configuration items.

.Lifecycle states and configurations
image::lifecycle-states.drawio.png[Lifecycle States]

.Mapping of item's lifecycle state to configuration set membership
[%autowidth]
[%header]
|===
| Lifecycle state | Production Configuration | Development Configuration
| `active` or missing | yes | yes
| `proposed` | no | yes
| `deprecated` | yes | no
| other | no | no
|===

Lifecycle state is currently supported on the following configuration items:

- resource,
- resource object class,
- resource object type,
- resource object attribute,
- resource object association,
- synchronization reaction,
- abstract roles (role, org, service, archetype),
- assignment,
- object template,
- mapping.

NOTE: For short, we will sometimes use the statement "configuration item (like a resource) is in development mode" to denote the fact that the item is part of the development configuration but not present in the production one.
On the other hand, when we say that "item is in production mode", we mean that it is a part of the production configuration without saying anything about whether it is also part of the development configuration.

=== Examples

==== Resource in Development Configuration Only

The following resource is in development configuration only.

.Listing 1: Example of a resource in development configuration only
[source,xml]
----
<resource xmlns="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3">
    <name>CSV resource</name>
    <!-- ... -->
    <lifecycleState>proposed</lifecycleState>
    <!-- ... -->
</resource>
----

This setting guarantees that the content of the real resource will not be touched by midPoint.
All operations that could affect this resource could only be simulated.

==== Replacing a Mapping in an Object Template

The following setup can be used to preview a migration from old to new organizational unit by switching mappings in an object template.

.Listing 2: Example of switching mappings in an object template
[source,xml]
----
<objectTemplate xmlns="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3">
    <name>person-template</name>
    <mapping> <!--1-->
        <strength>strong</strength>
        <expression>
            <value>ACME</value>
        </expression>
        <target>
            <path>organization</path>
        </target>
    </mapping>
    <mapping>
        <lifecycleState>deprecated</lifecycleState> <!--2-->
        <strength>strong</strength>
        <expression>
            <value>old-unit</value>
        </expression>
        <target>
            <path>organizationalUnit</path>
        </target>
    </mapping>
    <mapping>
        <lifecycleState>proposed</lifecycleState> <!--3-->
        <strength>strong</strength>
        <expression>
            <value>new-unit</value>
        </expression>
        <target>
            <path>organizationalUnit</path>
        </target>
    </mapping>
</objectTemplate>
----
<1> No explicit lifecycle state means "active".
Hence, this mapping is part of both production and development configurations.
<2> The `deprecated` state means that this mapping belongs only to the production configuration.
<3> The `proposed` state means that this mapping belongs only to the development configuration.

The third mapping serves as a replacement for the second one in the development configuration.
Hence, when you run a persistent-effect activity (or a simulation using production configuration), users are assigned to `old-unit`.
But when running a simulation using the development configuration, the users are assigned to `new-unit` instead.

== Typical Simulation Scenarios

This section presents a couple of typical simulation-related scenarios.

NOTE: Please see the xref:/midpoint/reference/simulation/tutorial/[tutorial] where these scenarios are shown in more detail.

=== Introduction of a New Resource Configuration

When connecting a new source or target system to midPoint, we must create its resource definition.
However, the first version of the definition is rarely completely correct, and usually there is a need to fine-tune it.
MidPoint supports this by allowing us to evolve the definition safely in development mode so that potential mistakes will not cause any harm to production data in midPoint or on resources.

Processes directly supported in this area include:

- classification of resource objects (e.g., accounts) into object types, like `account/default` or `account/person`;
- correlation of resource objects to so-called focus objects, like users, roles, and so on;
- mapping of data between resource objects and focus objects.

=== Evolution of a Resource Configuration

Eventually, the first version of resource configuration is completed and put into production use.
Sooner or later, requirements for its evolution will emerge.
The simulations feature supports such evolution by allowing adding pieces of the configuration (like new object types, attributes, associations, or mappings) first in the development mode and, after they have been developed and tested enough, switching them into production.
Also, other items can be replaced by marking them as deprecated and adding analogous proposed items.
Yet other items can be deprecated without replacement, effectively planning for their removal.

== Specific Functionality
// TODO better name

=== Switching Between Production and Development Mode

Various configuration items (such as a resource) can be switched between production and development mode using a button in the GUI.
An example is shown in Figure 3.

.Switching between production and development mode for a resource
image::production-development-mode.png[Switching between production and development mode for a resource, width=750]

=== Running the Simulation on Foreground

Simulation results and related objects can be displayed via the midPoint GUI.
For more information, please see xref:../admin-gui/simulations.adoc#_running_the_simulation_on_foreground[Simulations UI].

=== Running the Simulation on Background

The simulations are typically executed in background tasks that host individual xref:/midpoint/reference/tasks/activities/[activities].
There are three aspects that can be defined:

==== Execution Mode

An activity can be run in one of three basic modes:

1. *Full execution.*
All computed changes are applied; everything has persistent effects.
This is the <<Persistent-Effects Mode>> described in the introduction.

2. *Simulation (or preview).*
Changes to the data (user properties, account attributes, and so on) are only simulated; nothing is really changed in midPoint or on resources.
This is the <<Simulation Mode>> described in the introduction.footnote:[Simulation and preview are used as synonyms.]

3. *Shadow management simulation (or preview).*
This is a special low-level simulation of shadow-management-related changes that are normally applied automatically.
Those changes are related to shadow _classification_, i.e., determining its kind and intent, and shadow _correlation_, i.e., determining its owner.
In modes 1 and 2, such changes are applied automatically because they have no visible effects on the identity data.
However, we may preview even those changes to make the development of classification and correlation configuration easier.
This is xref:/midpoint/versioning/experimental/[experimental functionality].
Please see the xref:/midpoint/reference/simulation/tutorial/[tutorial] for an example.

This configuration is driven by the `execution/mode` parameter in the activity definition.

For more information, please see the xref:/midpoint/reference/tasks/activities/execution-mode.adoc[activity execution mode specification].

==== Configuration Used

An activity can execute against <<Production Configuration>> or <<Development Configuration>>.
(The latter cannot be used in <<Persistent-Effects Mode>>.)

This configuration is driven by `execution/configurationToUse` parameter in the activity definition.

For more information, please see xref:/midpoint/reference/tasks/activities/execution-mode.adoc[activity execution mode specification].

==== Simulation Result

We can run the simulation with or without creating the simulation result.
Furthermore, there are various options connected with the result itself, such as what metrics and event marks we should include in the result.

This configuration is driven by the `reporting/simulationResult` parameter in the activity definition.

For more information, please see <<Configuring Simulation Results>> and xref:/midpoint/reference/tasks/activities/reporting/simulation-result.adoc[activity simulation result definition].

==== An Example

.Listing 3. An import task executing in simulation mode, over development configuration, and with creation of a simulation result
[source,xml]
----
<task xmlns="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3"
      xmlns:ri="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/resource/instance-3"
      oid="8b169df3-3124-4e36-871f-83bb52acfd7b">
    <name>Simulated import from HR</name>
    <executionState>runnable</executionState>
    <activity>
        <work>
            <import>
                <resourceObjects>
                    <resourceRef oid="236dd5ca-47df-403c-82e1-9ce2f36be000"/>
                    <objectclass>ri:AccountObjectClass</objectclass>
                </resourceObjects>
            </import>
        </work>
        <execution>
            <mode>preview</mode> <!--1-->
            <configurationToUse>
                <set>development</set> <!--2-->
            </configurationToUse>
        </execution>
        <reporting>
            <simulationResult/> <!--3-->
        </reporting>
    </activity>
</task>
----
<1> The value of `preview` means we do not want to execute the actions in this task.
<2> `development` means we want to use the development configuration in this task.
<3> The presence of `simulationResult` means we want to create the simulation result object.

=== Displaying and Managing the Simulation Results

Simulation results and related objects can be displayed via midPoint GUI.
For more information, please see xref:../admin-gui/simulations.adoc[Simulations UI].

=== Configuring Simulation Results

Simulation results are configured in the system configuration and in individual simulation activities.
Aspects that are configured include:

- What metrics and event marks should be observed during the particular simulation?
- Should a dedicated database partition be used for storing this simulation result?

Please see xref:results/definition.adoc[] for more information.

=== Reporting

Simulation results can be displayed interactively via the midPoint GUI, or their content can be exported using the xref:/midpoint/reference/misc/reports/configuration/[reporting] functionality.

There are the following built-in simulation reports.

.Built-in simulation reports
[%autowidth]
|===
| Report | Description | Typical use

| xref:reports/results.adoc[]
| Lists simulation results without having a look at individual processed objects.
Shows metadata and individual metrics.
| overview, trends

| xref:reports/objects.adoc[]
| Lists objects processed by a given simulation.
One processed object corresponds to one report row.
| high-level view of one simulation

| xref:reports/objects-with-metrics.adoc[]
| Lists objects processed by a given simulation along with metrics related to each object.
| more detailed quantitative analysis of the simulation

| xref:reports/items-changed.adoc[]
| Lists items changed within individual processed objects.
| changes of items, suitable especially for single-valued ones

| xref:reports/values-changed.adoc[]
| Lists values added or deleted within individual items in processed objects.
| changes of items, suitable especially for multivalued ones with a larger number of values
|===

// === Application Programming Interface
// #TODO#

// === Configuring Lifecycle State
// #TODO#

== Limitations

. Simulations in multi-node tasks are not supported yet.
. xref:/midpoint/reference/expressions/expressions/index.adoc#_create_on_demand[Create on demand] scenarios are supported in a limited way:
Creation of target objects is simulated, but not remembered across objects or even mapping evaluations.
Hence, simulated object creation is reported multiple times.
The delta visualization is not finished as well: midPoint shows OIDs instead of names there.

. Errors during pre-clockwork stage are not captured.
. Shadows that do not enter clockwork stage are not captured.
. Provisioning-level operations are not captured (just like in audit).
. #TODO complete this list#

=== Shadow Management Simulations

. This is an experimental feature.
. There are often two records for each processed shadow: one for classification, one for correlation.
. In this mode, higher-level processing (synchronization) is always skipped.
. Errors are not reported in this mode.
They can not be seen in the simulation result, only in the respective task.
