docs/admin-gui/dashboards/compliance-dashboard/index.adoc, before:

---
midpoint-feature: compliance-dashboard
doc-type: intro
---
= Compliance dashboard
:page-keywords: [ 'dashboards', 'dashboard', 'compliance', 'regulation', 'cybersecurity' ]
:page-since: "4.10"
:page-display-order: 40
:page-upkeep-status: green

== Description

Compliance dashboard provides aggregated overview of information and metrics related to regulatory compliance of organization.
MidPoint contains a pre-configured dashboard, which provides overview of basic compliance metrics, based on pre-configured policies and policy rules.

.Example of a compliance dashboard informing about the numbers of unclassified applications, users violating separation of duties (SoD), or suspicious roles.
image::compliance-dashboard-screenshot.png["Example of a compliance dashboard informing about the numbers of unclassified applications, users violating separation of duties (SoD), or suspicious roles."]

Compliance dashboard is a pre-configured object (a.k.a. xref:/midpoint/reference/deployment/ninja/command/initial-objects/[initial object]) in midPoint.
The dashboard can be further extended and customized as needed.

== Mechanism

Functionality of compliance dashboard is heavily based on feature:policy-concept[policies], feature:policy-rule[policy rules] and xref:/midpoint/reference/concepts/mark/[marks], as is described at xref:/midpoint/reference/roles-policies/policies/identity-governance-rules/[] page.
Policy rules, stored in xref:/midpoint/reference/schema/policy/[policy objects] are setting the xref:/midpoint/reference/concepts/mark/[marks], which are used by compliance dashboard for compliance reporting.

== See also

* xref:/midpoint/compliance/[MidPoint Compliance]

* xref:/midpoint/reference/roles-policies/policies/identity-governance-rules/[]

* xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/dashboards/[]

Commit message:

Add section on continuous auditing

docs/admin-gui/dashboards/compliance-dashboard/index.adoc, after:

---
midpoint-feature: compliance-dashboard
doc-type: intro
---
= Compliance dashboard
:page-keywords: [ 'dashboards', 'dashboard', 'compliance', 'regulation', 'cybersecurity' ]
:page-since: "4.10"
:page-display-order: 40
:page-upkeep-status: green

== Description

Compliance dashboard provides aggregated overview of information and metrics related to regulatory compliance of organization.
MidPoint contains a pre-configured dashboard, which provides overview of basic compliance metrics, based on pre-configured policies and policy rules.

.Example of a compliance dashboard informing about the numbers of unclassified applications, users violating separation of duties (SoD), or suspicious roles.
image::compliance-dashboard-screenshot.png["Example of a compliance dashboard informing about the numbers of unclassified applications, users violating separation of duties (SoD), or suspicious roles."]

Compliance dashboard is a pre-configured object (a.k.a. xref:/midpoint/reference/deployment/ninja/command/initial-objects/[initial object]) in midPoint.
The dashboard can be further extended and customized as needed.

== Mechanism

Functionality of compliance dashboard is heavily based on feature:policy-concept[policies], feature:policy-rule[policy rules] and xref:/midpoint/reference/concepts/mark/[marks], as is described at xref:/midpoint/reference/roles-policies/policies/identity-governance-rules/[] page.
Policy rules, stored in xref:/midpoint/reference/schema/policy/[policy objects] are setting the xref:/midpoint/reference/concepts/mark/[marks], which are used by compliance dashboard for compliance reporting.

== Continuous auditing

Continuous auditing is the practice of evaluating compliance—security, regulatory, or internal—on an ongoing, automated basis rather than through periodic manual reviews.

In midPoint, policies, policy rules, and marks define the expected state of objects (e.g., required attributes, segregation of duties, prohibited configurations, etc.).
The compliance dashboard visualizes the results of those evaluations in real time, and shows violations of these policies.
You can set up xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/dashboards/dashboard-architecture/#static-reports-created-from-dashboards[dashboard reports] to get an early warning, keep an eye on the severity of the violations, and possibly track trends over time.

By surfacing this information continuously, the dashboard enables your organization to detect drift, remediate issues promptly, and produce audit‑ready evidence without waiting for a scheduled audit cycle.
Continuous auditing also reduces your staff stress levels; they no longer wake up in the middle of the night, drenched in cold sweat, screaming, "Save me, yet another audit round is coming!"

Jokes aside, it is the reality that compliance dashboards and continuous auditing transform and elevate compliance monitoring from a reactive, point‑in‑time activity into a proactive, always‑on control mechanism.

== See also

* xref:/midpoint/compliance/[MidPoint Compliance]

* xref:/midpoint/reference/roles-policies/policies/identity-governance-rules/[]

* xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/dashboards/[]
