docs/upgrade/database-schema-upgrade.adoc, before:

= Database Schema Upgrade
:page-wiki-name: Database Schema Upgrade
:page-wiki-id: 17761220
:page-wiki-metadata-create-user: semancik
:page-wiki-metadata-create-date: 2015-04-16T19:47:06.934+02:00
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-user: virgo
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-date: 2020-10-27T17:08:38.510+01:00
:page-alias: { "parent" : "/midpoint/reference/repository/", "display-order" : 800 }
:page-upkeep-status: orange
:page-toc: top

== Introduction

New midPoint releases usually bring new features.
New features usually require the extension of midPoint xref:/midpoint/reference/schema/[data model] to use them.
The changes of data model usually require extension of the schema of the database that stores midPoint objects.
This is the usual routine for most midPoint xref:/midpoint/reference/upgrade/upgradeability/[upgrades].

MidPoint distributions come with the database upgrade scripts.
These scripts contain a set of SQL commands (usually `ALTER TABLE` commands) that extend the schema of existing database.
The scripts are designed to be non-desctructive, therefore they can safely be executed over a database that is populated with data.
(Of course, the usual backup routine is strongly recommended.)

=== The right process for the right repository

Since version 4.4, midPoint features two SQL repository implementations and these have different upgrade procedures.
It is absolutely critical to use the right upgrade script for the right repository.
While the upgrade uses upgrade scripts in both cases, there are small differences for each repository.
To make it simpler, there are separate sections for each repository implementation below.

.How do I know what repository I'm using?
[TIP]
====
One should know what repo is used.
But just in case, there is a couple of ways to find out:

* In GUI go to *About* page and check *Repository* panel.
If *Implementation name* says *Native*, you are using the new xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/[Native repository] recommended from version 4.4 on.
Old Generic repo says *SQL* instead.

* If in your `config.xml` the content of `repository/type` element is `native` (or `sqale`, or `scale`, casing does not matter), you are using the xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/[Native repository].
If there is `generic` (or `sql`) instead, or there is no `type` element under `repository`, but `repositoryServiceFactoryClass`
is used instead, you are using the old repository.

* If you are connected to the database, there are some differences in tables.
Try `select * from m_uri limit 1` - if it works without any error (even if it does not return anything),
you are using the new xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/[Native repository].
If it doesn't work - and `select * from m_object_text_info limit 1` on the other hand does - then
you are using the old repository.
====

== Upgrading Native PostgreSQL Repository

This section describes how to upgrade the xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/[Native repository].
For future releases, the process should be similar to previous upgrades.

=== Upgrade Script Location

[%autowidth,cols="h,1"]
|===
| Distribution | Script location

| Binary
| <distribution root>/doc/config/sql/native/

| Source
| <source code root>/config/sql/native/

|===

[IMPORTANT]
Always use the scripts from the version you want to upgrade to - either from distribution or from sources.
Do not use the upgrade scripts from the `master` branch, e.g. downloaded directly from GitHub, as these may
contain development changes already (unless you really want to try the cutting edge development version).

=== Executing the script

The Native repository has separate upgrade scripts for the main portion of the repository
(`postgres-upgrade.sql`) and for the audit tables (`postgres-audit-upgrade.sql`).
This makes the process easier for deployments with separate audit database - you simply use the right upgrade script on each database.
If both repository and audit is in the same database, use both scripts on the same database.

The scripts do not contain any version number and are safe to run repeatedly - only the missing changes are applied.

[IMPORTANT]
====
If you created the schema objects as non-superuser as described xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/usage/#installing-as-non-superuser[here],
be sure to run all the missing `CREATE EXTENSION` commands as a superuser first!
This is also a good reason to use `-v ON_ERROR_STOP=1` flag with the `psql` - as shown below.
This stops the upgrade when the first such problem occurs, but works fine if the extension already exists.
====

To upgrade the main repository run this command:
[source,bash]
----
psql -v ON_ERROR_STOP=1 -h localhost -U midpoint -W -d midpoint -f postgres-upgrade.sql
----

To upgrade the audit database (here on the same server, but different database) run:
[source,bash]
----
psql -v ON_ERROR_STOP=1 -h localhost -U midaudit -W -d midaudit -f postgres-audit-upgrade.sql
----

To upgrade database containing both, use multiple `-f` options:
[source,bash]
----
psql -v ON_ERROR_STOP=1 -h localhost -U midpoint -W -d midpoint \
  -f postgres-upgrade.sql -f postgres-audit-upgrade.sql
----

The scripts store their internal version information in the `m_global_metadata` table.
Please, do not modify this table manually.

[IMPORTANT]
====
You can use other client than `psql`, but the client must send the commands to the server separately.
E.g. IDEA Ultimate Edition or DataGrip from JetBrains work fine.

Some clients, notably https://www.pgadmin.org/[pgAdmin], send the whole content in a single request.
Please, do not use them to run upgrade scripts!
====


== Upgrading Generic Repository

This section describes how to upgrade the xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/generic/[Generic repository].

=== Upgrade Script Location

[%autowidth,cols="h,1"]
|===
| Distribution | Script location

| Binary
| <distribution root>/doc/config/sql/generic/

| Source
| <source code root>/config/sql/generic/

|===

The script file name is constructed in a form:

<database>-upgrade-<from version>-<to version>.sql

e.g. `oracle-upgrade-4.5-4.6.sql` is an upgrade script for PostgreSQL database that upgrades midPoint 4.5 to midPoint 4.6.

=== Executing the script

The scripts should be executed by the usual way the SQL script is executed for any particular database.
Perhaps the best way is to use command-line tools.
Please refer to the documentation of your database system for the details.
E.g., the upgrade script for PostgreSQL database is usually executed like this:

[source,bash]
----
psql -h localhost -U midpoint -W -d midpoint -f oracle-upgrade-4.5-4.6.sql
----

The scripts are designed to be run only once - unlike upgrade scripts for the Native repository, they are not idempotent.

[TIP]
====
Strictly speaking, the _version_ term above refers to the _database schema version_, not the midPoint version.
These are the same for the majority of cases.
For generic repository, the latest version of repository script is "4.6" and there were no changes afterward for generic repository.
See xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/generic/database-schema-versioning/[Database schema versioning] for more information.
====

== See Also

* xref:/midpoint/reference/upgrade/upgradeability/[Upgradeability]

* xref:/midpoint/reference/upgrade/upgrade-guide/[Upgrade HOWTO]

* xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/generic/database-schema-versioning/[Database schema versioning] (Generic repository)

Commit message:

Updated docs and release notes
 - Added more links to using search in scripts
 - Added need for reindex to database schema upgrade docs
 - Added need for reindex to upgrade guide

docs/upgrade/database-schema-upgrade.adoc, after:

= Database Schema Upgrade
:page-wiki-name: Database Schema Upgrade
:page-wiki-id: 17761220
:page-wiki-metadata-create-user: semancik
:page-wiki-metadata-create-date: 2015-04-16T19:47:06.934+02:00
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-user: virgo
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-date: 2020-10-27T17:08:38.510+01:00
:page-alias: { "parent" : "/midpoint/reference/repository/", "display-order" : 800 }
:page-upkeep-status: orange
:page-toc: top

== Introduction

New midPoint releases usually bring new features.
New features usually require the extension of midPoint xref:/midpoint/reference/schema/[data model] to use them.
The changes of data model usually require extension of the schema of the database that stores midPoint objects.
This is the usual routine for most midPoint xref:/midpoint/reference/upgrade/upgradeability/[upgrades].

MidPoint distributions come with the database upgrade scripts.
These scripts contain a set of SQL commands (usually `ALTER TABLE` commands) that extend the schema of existing database.
The scripts are designed to be non-desctructive, therefore they can safely be executed over a database that is populated with data.
(Of course, the usual backup routine is strongly recommended.)

IMPORTANT: Database schema upgrade usually introduces new columns which needs to be populated from full object. It is highly recommended to run Reindex Repository Task (GUI -> About -> Reindex Repository Objects) after database schema upgrades.

=== The right process for the right repository

Since version 4.4, midPoint features two SQL repository implementations and these have different upgrade procedures.
It is absolutely critical to use the right upgrade script for the right repository.
While the upgrade uses upgrade scripts in both cases, there are small differences for each repository.
To make it simpler, there are separate sections for each repository implementation below.

.How do I know what repository I'm using?
[TIP]
====
One should know what repo is used.
But just in case, there is a couple of ways to find out:

* In GUI go to *About* page and check *Repository* panel.
If *Implementation name* says *Native*, you are using the new xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/[Native repository] recommended from version 4.4 on.
Old Generic repo says *SQL* instead.

* If in your `config.xml` the content of `repository/type` element is `native` (or `sqale`, or `scale`, casing does not matter), you are using the xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/[Native repository].
If there is `generic` (or `sql`) instead, or there is no `type` element under `repository`, but `repositoryServiceFactoryClass`
is used instead, you are using the old repository.

* If you are connected to the database, there are some differences in tables.
Try `select * from m_uri limit 1` - if it works without any error (even if it does not return anything),
you are using the new xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/[Native repository].
If it doesn't work - and `select * from m_object_text_info limit 1` on the other hand does - then
you are using the old repository.
====

== Upgrading Native PostgreSQL Repository

This section describes how to upgrade the xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/[Native repository].
For future releases, the process should be similar to previous upgrades.

=== Upgrade Script Location

[%autowidth,cols="h,1"]
|===
| Distribution | Script location

| Binary
| <distribution root>/doc/config/sql/native/

| Source
| <source code root>/config/sql/native/

|===

[IMPORTANT]
Always use the scripts from the version you want to upgrade to - either from distribution or from sources.
Do not use the upgrade scripts from the `master` branch, e.g. downloaded directly from GitHub, as these may
contain development changes already (unless you really want to try the cutting edge development version).

=== Executing the script

The Native repository has separate upgrade scripts for the main portion of the repository
(`postgres-upgrade.sql`) and for the audit tables (`postgres-audit-upgrade.sql`).
This makes the process easier for deployments with separate audit database - you simply use the right upgrade script on each database.
If both repository and audit is in the same database, use both scripts on the same database.

The scripts do not contain any version number and are safe to run repeatedly - only the missing changes are applied.

[IMPORTANT]
====
If you created the schema objects as non-superuser as described xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/usage/#installing-as-non-superuser[here],
be sure to run all the missing `CREATE EXTENSION` commands as a superuser first!
This is also a good reason to use `-v ON_ERROR_STOP=1` flag with the `psql` - as shown below.
This stops the upgrade when the first such problem occurs, but works fine if the extension already exists.
====

To upgrade the main repository run this command:
[source,bash]
----
psql -v ON_ERROR_STOP=1 -h localhost -U midpoint -W -d midpoint -f postgres-upgrade.sql
----

To upgrade the audit database (here on the same server, but different database) run:
[source,bash]
----
psql -v ON_ERROR_STOP=1 -h localhost -U midaudit -W -d midaudit -f postgres-audit-upgrade.sql
----

To upgrade database containing both, use multiple `-f` options:
[source,bash]
----
psql -v ON_ERROR_STOP=1 -h localhost -U midpoint -W -d midpoint \
  -f postgres-upgrade.sql -f postgres-audit-upgrade.sql
----

The scripts store their internal version information in the `m_global_metadata` table.
Please, do not modify this table manually.

[IMPORTANT]
====
You can use other client than `psql`, but the client must send the commands to the server separately.
E.g. IDEA Ultimate Edition or DataGrip from JetBrains work fine.

Some clients, notably https://www.pgadmin.org/[pgAdmin], send the whole content in a single request.
Please, do not use them to run upgrade scripts!
====


== Upgrading Generic Repository

This section describes how to upgrade the xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/generic/[Generic repository].

=== Upgrade Script Location

[%autowidth,cols="h,1"]
|===
| Distribution | Script location

| Binary
| <distribution root>/doc/config/sql/generic/

| Source
| <source code root>/config/sql/generic/

|===

The script file name is constructed in a form:

<database>-upgrade-<from version>-<to version>.sql

e.g. `oracle-upgrade-4.5-4.6.sql` is an upgrade script for PostgreSQL database that upgrades midPoint 4.5 to midPoint 4.6.

=== Executing the script

The scripts should be executed by the usual way the SQL script is executed for any particular database.
Perhaps the best way is to use command-line tools.
Please refer to the documentation of your database system for the details.
E.g., the upgrade script for PostgreSQL database is usually executed like this:

[source,bash]
----
psql -h localhost -U midpoint -W -d midpoint -f oracle-upgrade-4.5-4.6.sql
----

The scripts are designed to be run only once - unlike upgrade scripts for the Native repository, they are not idempotent.

[TIP]
====
Strictly speaking, the _version_ term above refers to the _database schema version_, not the midPoint version.
These are the same for the majority of cases.
For generic repository, the latest version of repository script is "4.6" and there were no changes afterward for generic repository.
See xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/generic/database-schema-versioning/[Database schema versioning] for more information.
====

== See Also

* xref:/midpoint/reference/upgrade/upgradeability/[Upgradeability]

* xref:/midpoint/reference/upgrade/upgrade-guide/[Upgrade HOWTO]

* xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/generic/database-schema-versioning/[Database schema versioning] (Generic repository)
