docs/admin-gui/dashboards/configuration/index.adoc, before:

= Dashboard Configuration
:page-nav-title: Configuration
:page-wiki-name: Dashboard configuration
:page-wiki-id: 36569129
:page-wiki-metadata-create-user: lskublik
:page-wiki-metadata-create-date: 2019-08-06T13:26:25.499+02:00
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-user: katkav
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-date: 2020-12-10T12:36:51.667+01:00
:page-since: "4.2"
:page-toc: top


For basic information about this feature please see xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/dashboards/[Customizable Dashboards] and xref:/midpoint/devel/design/dashboards-widgets-and-reports-design-notes/['Dashboards, Widgets and Reports Design Notes'].

Here we describe configurable dashboard and report, which is generated from a dashboard.

For whole sample please see link:https://github.com/Evolveum/midpoint-samples/tree/master/samples/dashboard[dashboard-system-status].


== Dashboard

Dashboard is new configurable object in midpoint, which show basic information about state of Midpoint.
Dashboard contains name, display with label and widgets.

[source,xml]
----
<dashboard>
     <name>system-status-dashboard</name>
     <display>
         <label>System Status Dashboard</label>
     </display>
     <widget>
         ...
     </widget>
     <widget>
         ...
     </widget>
     ...
</dashboard>
----

In 4.2 dashboards are shown automatically when defined.
Since 4.3 there is a need for configuration to define which dashboards should be shown in the left (sidebar) menu.
The configuration is show below:

++++
{% include since.html since="4.3" %}
++++

.Configuration to show dashboard in the menu
[source,xml]
----
<adminGuiConfiguration>
    ...
    <configurableUserDashboard>
        <identifier>admin-dashboard</identifier>
        <display>
            <label>Admin dashboard</label>
        </display>
        <configurableDashboardRef oid="00000000-0000-0000-0001-000000000001"/>
        <visibility>visible</visibility>
    </configurableUserDashboard>
</adminGuiConfiguration>
----

The example above show how to configure dashboards to be shown in the left (sidebar) menu.
Property _display_ defines the name of the link which is shown in the menu.
If it isn't defined, the display property of referenced DashboardType is used.
Property _configurableDashboardRef_ is used to reference specific DashboardType.
If it isn't defined, midPoint ignores the whole configuration.
For visibility settings, since 4.3 use _visibility_ property in _configurableUserDashboard_ instead of visibility in DashboardType.

We have two kinds of widgets, widget for _objectCollection_ and widget for _objectType_.


=== Widget

Widget contains three basic cofiguration attributes `display`,`data` and `presentation`.


==== `display`

Attribute `display` contains the configuration of the widget's visual side in the GUI.
Possible configuration attributes of `display`:

[%autowidth]
|===
| Name | Type | Description

| `label`
| String
| Displayed name of Widget.


| `color`
| String
| Default color of background for widget.


| `icon/cssClass`
| String
| CssClass for widget icon for example "fa fa-user".


| `cssStyle`
| String
| CssStyle for widget for example "color: #444 !important" for change of font color.


|===

==== `data`

Attribute `data` represents the data source that the widget displays.
We have two kinds of data:

* for _objectCollection_
* for _objectType_

Possible configuration attributes of `data`:

[%autowidth]
|===
| Name | Type | Description

| `sourceType`
| DashboardWidgetSourceTypeType
| Type of widget content data source.
Specify type of input data, which midPoint use for generating message showed in widget.
This is enumeration type and possible values is  _objectCollection_ (content of widget is based on object collection), _auditSearch_ (content of the widget will be based on data from object collection with filter for audit records) and _object_ (content of the widget will be based on data from a single object). We describe using `sourceType` and `displaySourceType` in example under table.

| `displaySourceType`
| DashboardWidgetSourceTypeType
| This attribute is an identifier that override sourceType. We can use it for asynchronous widget.
This element is used only for number message showed in widget in GUI. Widget in GUI can contain link for redirect to details page and for it is still used sourceType. We describe using `sourceType` and `displaySourceType` in example under table.


| `collection`
| CollectionRefSpecificationType
| Specification of an explicit or implicit object collection that will be used as data source for the view.
Contains variable _collectionRef,_ which is reference to object collection is displayed in widget.


| `objectRef`
| ObjectReferenceType
| Specification of a single object as a widget data source.

| `storedData`
| String
| Specification of a string data as a widget data source. This data can be stored by report task. Widget show it by using of asynchronous widget.

|===

===== Using `sourceType` and `displaySourceType`

When we want use basic widget, so using directly `sourceType` as `objectCollection`, `auditSearch` and `object`.

The `displaySourceType` is important for asynchronous widget. We set `widgetData` as `displaySourceType` and we can set `objectCollection` as `sourceType`, this mean that widget show stored data from attribute `storedData`, but for link of details use `sourceType`. We can't forget, that `sourceType` will also use by Export report task for generation `storedData`.

When we use source `objectCollection` or `auditSearch`, midPoint need reference to object collection which contains filter for data.

Example of widget data source for object collection:

[source,xml]
----
<widget>
    ...
    <data>
        <sourceType>objectCollection</sourceType>
        <collection>
            <collectionRef oid="15de186e-1d8c-11e9-a469-8f5d9cfc0259" type="c:ObjectCollectionType"/>
        </collection>
    </data>
</widget>
----

We can define `object` as source, when we have to configure reference for object, which will be use as source. In next configuration we can define path for attribute, which widget will show.

Example of widget data source for object type:

[source,xml]
----
<widget>
    ...
    <data>
        <sourceType>object</sourceType>
        <objectRef oid="00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000005" type="c:TaskType"/>
    </data>
</widget>
----

Widget from GUI with data source for Cleanup task and path for state attribute:

image::object.png[]

When we can use asynchronous widget, we use `objectCollection`, `auditSearch` or `object` as source, but we have to use `widgetData` as source for display.

Example of widget data source for widget data (asynchronous widget):

[source,xml]
----
<widget>
    ...
    <data>
        <sourceType>objectCollection</sourceType>
        <displaySourceType>widgetData</displaySourceType>
        <collection>
            <collectionRef oid="15de186e-1d8c-11e9-a469-8f5d9cfc0259" type="c:ObjectCollectionType"/>
        </collection>
        <storedData>25/25 runnable</storedData>
    </data>
</widget>
----

==== `presentation`

Presentation define how will be data presented.
We define four basic kind of presentation:

* percentage (50%)

image::percentage.png[]

* separated with slash (5/10)

image::slash.png[]

* separated with "of" (5 of 10)

image::of.png[]

* only value (5)

image::only-value.png[]

Presentation contains three attributes: `dataField`, `variation` and `view`.


===== `dataField`

First is `dataField`, which is properties of a specific widget data field.
Note that the order of dataField elements is NOT significant.
The field order is given by specific presentation style.

Attributes for `dataField`:

[%autowidth]
|===
| Name | Type | Description

| `fieldType`
| DashboardWidgetDataFieldTypeType
| Type of the field.
We support values `value` and `unit` now.
`value` is data field, which define displaying basic information, so number.
`unit` define units for number. For example in message '5/9 up', where '5/9' is generated via configuration for `value` and 'up' is generated via configuration for `unit`.


| `expression`
| ExpressionType
| Expression that produces value to display in the widget.


|===

For `fieldType` `value`, we define new type of expression ProportionalExpressionEvaluatorType `proportional` with attribute `style`. Variable `style` is enumeration type with values `percentage` (for example 50%), `value-slash-domain` (for example 5/10), `value-of-domain` (for example 5 of 10) and `value-only` (for example 5).

===== `variation`

Next presentation attribute is `variation`. Conditional variation in the way how the widget is displayed.
Variations may change colors or icons of the widget based on a condition.
Attributes for `variation`:

[%autowidth]
|===
| Name | Type | Description

| `condition`
| ExpressionType
| Condition for the variation.
The variation will be active if the condition evaluates to true.


| `display`
| DisplayType
| Display properties to apply in case that the condition is true.
Those display properties specify only those presentation aspects that are different from the usual presentation.
This is supposed to be merged with the primary display properties of the widget.
E.g. if the variation only changes widget color, only color needs to be specified here.
Icon and other styles are taken from the primary widget display properties.


|===

`condition` can get four variables:

[%autowidth]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | sourceType in data of widget

| `proportional`
| IntegerStatType
| Integer stat (statistic) entry.
This entry contains stat value, together with domain value.
| objectCollection, auditSearch


| `policySituations`
| Collection<String>
| Collection of policy situations.
| objectCollection


| `object`
| base on displayed object in widget
| Processed object.
| object


| `storedData`
| String
| Stored data from widget.
| widgetData


|===

===== `view`

Last variable of presentation is `view`, this variable is processed for report and we will look on it below.


Example of `presentation`:

[source,xml]
----
<widget>
    ...
    <presentation>
        <dataField>
            <fieldType>value</fieldType>
            <expression>
                <proportional xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:type="c:ProportionalExpressionEvaluatorType">
                    <style>percentage</style>
                </proportional>
            </expression>
        </dataField>
        <dataField>
            <fieldType>unit</fieldType>
            <expression>
                <value>up</value>
            </expression>
        </dataField>
        <variation>
            <condition>
                <script xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:type="c:ScriptExpressionEvaluatorType">
                    <code>
                        policySituations.contains("#resourceHealthDanger")
                    </code>
                </script>
            </condition>
            <display>
                <color>#dd4b39</color>
            </display>
        </variation>
    </presentation>
</widget>
----

=== Object Collection

You can see basic configuration for objectCollection on xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/collections-views/configuration/#object-collection[Object Collection].
For dashboard, we can use policyRule with policyTreshold for define some policySituation.
Example of object collection for resource, which have status UP:

[source,xml]
----
<objectCollection xmlns="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3"
                                  xmlns:q="http://prism.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/query-3"
                                  xmlns:c="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3"
                                  oid="15de186e-1d8c-11e9-a469-8f5d9cfc0259">
    <name>Resources Up</name>
    <assignment>
        <policyRule>
            <policyConstraints>
                <collectionStats>
                    <collection>
                        <interpretation>explicit</interpretation>
                    </collection>
                </collectionStats>
            </policyConstraints>
            <policySituation>#resourceHealthDanger</policySituation>
            <policyThreshold>
                <highWaterMark>
                    <percentage>99.9</percentage>
                </highWaterMark>
            </policyThreshold>
        </policyRule>
    </assignment>
    <type>ResourceType</type>
    <filter>
        <q:equal>
            <q:path>operationalState/lastAvailabilityStatus</q:path>
            <q:value>up</q:value>
        </q:equal>
    </filter>
    <domain>
        <collectionRef oid="00000000-0000-0000-0001-000000000006" type="c:ObjectCollectionType"/>
    </domain>
</objectCollection>
----

Variable _domain_ is a set of object that is "all the things" for this collection.
For example collection of "up resources" will have a domain "all resources".
In this example we use _policyRule_ with _policySituation_, which we can check in variation of widget presentation.
When policyTreshold is met policySituation from policyRule is presented in variation.
_policyThreshold_ have two important variables for us, lowWaterMark and highWaterMark.

lowWaterMark is lower bound of the threshold. Lowest value for which the policy rule is activated. The policy rule will be triggered for all values starting from this value up until the high water mark (closed interval). If no low water mark is specified then the policy rule will be activated for all values up to the high water mark. Policy rule with a threshold that does not have any water marks will never be activated.

highWaterMark is upper bound of the threshold. Highest value for which the policy rule is activated. The policy rule will be triggered for all values starting from low water mark up until this value (closed interval). If no high water mark is specified then the policy rule will be activated for all values that are greater than or equal to high water mark.

Both variables are WaterMarkType type, which contains variables count and percentage.

== Simple example for "enabled users widget"

Now we show very simple example for widget of enabled users, that show only number of enabled users in mP.

As first, we create object collection with filter for users with value `enabled` in attribute activation/effectiveStatus.
[source,xml]
----
<objectCollection oid="00000000-0000-0000-0001-000000147896">
   <name>All enabled users</name>
    <type>UserType</type>
    <filter>
        <equal>
            <path>activation/effectiveStatus</path>
            <value>enabled</value>
        </equal>
    </filter>
</objectCollection>
----
And next we create dashboard with one widget for enabled users.
[source,xml]
----
<dashboard oid="f89709f9-7313-494f-a600-69ea75d95106">
    <name>Example one widget for enabled users</name>
    <display>
        <label>Enabled users</label>
    </display>
    <widget>
        <identifier>enabled-users</identifier>
        <display>
            <label>Enabled users</label>
            <color>#00a65a</color>
            <icon>
                <cssClass>fa fa-user</cssClass>
            </icon>
        </display>
        <data>
            <sourceType>objectCollection</sourceType>
            <collection>
                <collectionRef oid="00000000-0000-0000-0001-000000147896" type="ObjectCollectionType"/>
            </collection>
        </data>
        <presentation>
            <dataField>
                <fieldType>value</fieldType>
                <expression>
                    <proportional>
                        <style>value-only</style>
                    </proportional>
                </expression>
            </dataField>
            <dataField>
                <fieldType>unit</fieldType>
                <expression>
                    <value>enabled</value>
                </expression>
            </dataField>
        </presentation>
    </widget>
</dashboard>
----
You don't forget add new dashboard to admin gui in system configuration and relogin for showing it in left sidebar menu. After opening of new dashboard in GUI you can see our new widget.

image::enabled-users.png[]

== Asynchronous widget

From 4.4 Midpoint support asynchronous widget. When we want to configure it, then we use `displaySourceType` in widget and set it as `widgetData`. We set `sourceType` as `objectCollection` because of redirect to details page and task, which generate stored data.

We need configure dashboard report task, which will be store data to widget. In dashboard report use element `storeExportedWidgetData` for defined where will be stored generated widget data.

For example, we use same case as previous example for enabled users.
We create same object collection.
[source,xml]
----
<objectCollection oid="00000000-0000-0000-0001-000000147896">
   <name>All enabled users</name>
    <type>UserType</type>
    <filter>
        <equal>
            <path>activation/effectiveStatus</path>
            <value>enabled</value>
        </equal>
    </filter>
</objectCollection>
----
As next, we create dashboard with one changes. We add attribute `displaySourceType` with value `widgetData`.
[source,xml]
----
<dashboard oid="f89709f9-7313-494f-a600-69ea75d95106">
    <name>Example one widget for enabled users</name>
    <display>
        <label>Enabled users</label>
    </display>
    <widget>
        <identifier>enabled-users</identifier>
        <display>
            <label>Enabled users</label>
            <color>#00a65a</color>
            <icon>
                <cssClass>fa fa-user</cssClass>
            </icon>
        </display>
        <data>
            <sourceType>objectCollection</sourceType>
            <displaySourceType>widgetData</displaySourceType>
            <collection>
                <collectionRef oid="00000000-0000-0000-0001-000000147896" type="ObjectCollectionType"/>
            </collection>
        </data>
        <presentation>
            <dataField>
                <fieldType>value</fieldType>
                <expression>
                    <proportional>
                        <style>value-only</style>
                    </proportional>
                </expression>
            </dataField>
            <dataField>
                <fieldType>unit</fieldType>
                <expression>
                    <value>enabled</value>
                </expression>
            </dataField>
        </presentation>
    </widget>
</dashboard>
----

Finally, we create report for dashboard.
[source,xml]
----
<report>
    <name>Enabled users report</name>
    <assignment>
        <targetRef oid="00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000170" type="ArchetypeType"/>
    </assignment>
    <dashboard>
        <dashboardRef oid="f89709f9-7313-494f-a600-69ea75d95106" type="DashboardType"/>
        <showOnlyWidgetsTable>true</showOnlyWidgetsTable>
        <storeExportedWidgetData>onlyWidget</storeExportedWidgetData>
    </dashboard>
</report>
----

Now we can run report and midPoint processes source data from dashboard and resulted data writes to widget in dashboard. During next showing of widget in GUI midPoint doesn't process source data but only show `savedData` from xml. We can see same result.

image::enabled-users.png[]

== View

When we create new dashboard, than we can see it in midpoint gui.
Next screenshot is displayed link:https://github.com/Evolveum/midpoint-samples/tree/master/samples/dashboard[dashboard-system-status].

image::dashboard-screenshot.png[]

'''

For whole sample please see link:https://github.com/Evolveum/midpoint-samples/tree/master/samples/dashboard[dashboard-system-status].

Commit message:

Dashboards - updates to dashboards configuration page and links in howto.

docs/admin-gui/dashboards/configuration/index.adoc, after:

= Dashboard Configuration
:page-nav-title: Configuration
:page-wiki-name: Dashboard configuration
:page-wiki-id: 36569129
:page-wiki-metadata-create-user: lskublik
:page-wiki-metadata-create-date: 2019-08-06T13:26:25.499+02:00
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-user: katkav
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-date: 2020-12-10T12:36:51.667+01:00
:page-since: "4.2"
:page-toc: top

Documentation about dashboards can be found at multiple places in docs. To avoid confusion, please see

- xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/dashboards/[Customizable Dashboards] page provides basic information about this feature.
- Guide for initial configuration, together with example, is provided in xref:/midpoint/guides/dashboards-howto[Dashboards HOWTO].
- Samples are at link:https://github.com/Evolveum/midpoint-samples/tree/master/samples/dashboard[samples/dashboard] on Github.
- Design notes for development of dashboards and reports can be found xref:/midpoint/devel/design/dashboards-widgets-and-reports-design-notes/[here].

This document describes details of configuration of dashboard and report that is generated from the dashboard.

== Dashboard

Dashboard is configurable object in midpoint, providing basic information about state of Midpoint.
Dashboard contains name, display with label and widget elements.

[source,xml]
----
<dashboard>
     <name>system-status-dashboard</name>
     <display>
         <label>System Status Dashboard</label>
     </display>
     <widget>
         ...
     </widget>
     <widget>
         ...
     </widget>
     ...
</dashboard>
----

In 4.2 dashboards were shown automatically when defined.
Since 4.3 there you have to define which dashboards should be shown in the left (sidebar) menu in system configuration.
The configuration is show below:

++++
{% include since.html since="4.3" %}
++++

.Configuration to show dashboard in the menu
[source,xml]
----
<adminGuiConfiguration>
    ...
    <configurableUserDashboard>
        <identifier>admin-dashboard</identifier>
        <display>
            <label>Admin dashboard</label>
        </display>
        <configurableDashboardRef oid="00000000-0000-0000-0001-000000000001"/>
        <visibility>visible</visibility>
    </configurableUserDashboard>
</adminGuiConfiguration>
----

The example above shows how to configure dashboards to be shown in the left (sidebar) menu.
Property _display_ defines the name of the link which is shown in the menu.
If it isn't defined, the display property of referenced DashboardType is used.
Property _configurableDashboardRef_ is used to reference specific DashboardType.
If it isn't defined, midPoint ignores the whole configuration.
For visibility settings, since 4.3 use _visibility_ property in _configurableUserDashboard_ instead of visibility in DashboardType.

We have two kinds of widgets, widget for _objectCollection_ and widget for _objectType_.


=== Widget

Widget contains three basic configuration attributes `display`,`data` and `presentation`.


==== `display`

Attribute `display` contains configuration of the widget's visual side in the GUI.
Possible configuration attributes of `display`:

[%autowidth]
|===
| Name | Type | Description

| `label`
| String
| Displayed name of Widget.


| `color`
| String
| Default color of background for widget.


| `icon/cssClass`
| String
| CssClass for widget icon for example "fa fa-user".


| `cssStyle`
| String
| CssStyle for widget for example "color: #444 !important" for change of font color.


|===

==== `data`

Attribute `data` represents the data source that the widget displays.
We have two kinds of data:

* for _objectCollection_
* for _objectType_

Possible configuration attributes of `data`:

[%autowidth]
|===
| Name | Type | Description

| `sourceType`
| DashboardWidgetSourceTypeType
| Type of widget content data source.
Specify type of input data, which midPoint use for generating message showed in widget.
This is enumeration type and possible values is  _objectCollection_ (content of widget is based on object collection), _auditSearch_ (content of the widget will be based on data from object collection with filter for audit records) and _object_ (content of the widget will be based on data from a single object). We describe using `sourceType` and `displaySourceType` in example under table.

| `displaySourceType`
| DashboardWidgetSourceTypeType
| This attribute is an identifier that override sourceType. We can use it for asynchronous widget.
This element is used only for number message showed in widget in GUI. Widget in GUI can contain link for redirect to details page and for it is still used sourceType. We describe using `sourceType` and `displaySourceType` in example under table.


| `collection`
| CollectionRefSpecificationType
| Specification of an explicit or implicit object collection that will be used as data source for the view.
Contains variable _collectionRef,_ which is reference to object collection is displayed in widget.


| `objectRef`
| ObjectReferenceType
| Specification of a single object as a widget data source.

| `storedData`
| String
| Specification of a string data as a widget data source. This data can be stored by report task. Widget show it by using of asynchronous widget.

|===

===== Using `sourceType` and `displaySourceType`

When we want to use basic widget, so using directly `sourceType` as `objectCollection`, `auditSearch` and `object`.

The `displaySourceType` is important for asynchronous widget. We set `widgetData` as `displaySourceType` and we can set `objectCollection` as `sourceType`, this mean that widget show stored data from attribute `storedData`, but for link of details use `sourceType`. We can't forget, that `sourceType` will also use by Export report task for generation `storedData`.

When we use source `objectCollection` or `auditSearch`, midPoint need reference to object collection which contains filter for data.

Example of widget data source for object collection:

[source,xml]
----
<widget>
    ...
    <data>
        <sourceType>objectCollection</sourceType>
        <collection>
            <collectionRef oid="15de186e-1d8c-11e9-a469-8f5d9cfc0259" type="c:ObjectCollectionType"/>
        </collection>
    </data>
</widget>
----

We can define `object` as source, when we have to configure reference for object, which will be use as source. In next configuration we can define path for attribute, which widget will show.

Example of widget data source for object type:

[source,xml]
----
<widget>
    ...
    <data>
        <sourceType>object</sourceType>
        <objectRef oid="00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000005" type="c:TaskType"/>
    </data>
</widget>
----

Widget from GUI with data source for Cleanup task and path for state attribute:

image::object.png[]

When we can use asynchronous widget, we use `objectCollection`, `auditSearch` or `object` as source, but we have to use `widgetData` as source for display.

Example of widget data source for widget data (asynchronous widget):

[source,xml]
----
<widget>
    ...
    <data>
        <sourceType>objectCollection</sourceType>
        <displaySourceType>widgetData</displaySourceType>
        <collection>
            <collectionRef oid="15de186e-1d8c-11e9-a469-8f5d9cfc0259" type="c:ObjectCollectionType"/>
        </collection>
        <storedData>25/25 runnable</storedData>
    </data>
</widget>
----

==== `presentation`

Presentation define how will be data presented.
We define four basic kind of presentation:

* percentage (50%)

image::percentage.png[]

* separated with slash (5/10)

image::slash.png[]

* separated with "of" (5 of 10)

image::of.png[]

* only value (5)

image::only-value.png[]

Presentation contains three attributes: `dataField`, `variation` and `view`.


===== `dataField`

First is `dataField`, which is properties of a specific widget data field.
Note that the order of dataField elements is NOT significant.
The field order is given by specific presentation style.

Attributes for `dataField`:

[%autowidth]
|===
| Name | Type | Description

| `fieldType`
| DashboardWidgetDataFieldTypeType
| Type of the field.
We support values `value` and `unit` now.
`value` is data field, which define displaying basic information, so number.
`unit` define units for number. For example in message '5/9 up', where '5/9' is generated via configuration for `value` and 'up' is generated via configuration for `unit`.


| `expression`
| ExpressionType
| Expression that produces value to display in the widget.


|===

For `fieldType` `value`, we define new type of expression ProportionalExpressionEvaluatorType `proportional` with attribute `style`. Variable `style` is enumeration type with values `percentage` (for example 50%), `value-slash-domain` (for example 5/10), `value-of-domain` (for example 5 of 10) and `value-only` (for example 5).

===== `variation`

Next presentation attribute is `variation`. Conditional variation in the way how the widget is displayed.
Variations may change colors or icons of the widget based on a condition.
Attributes for `variation`:

[%autowidth]
|===
| Name | Type | Description

| `condition`
| ExpressionType
| Condition for the variation.
The variation will be active if the condition evaluates to true.


| `display`
| DisplayType
| Display properties to apply in case that the condition is true.
Those display properties specify only those presentation aspects that are different from the usual presentation.
This is supposed to be merged with the primary display properties of the widget.
E.g. if the variation only changes widget color, only color needs to be specified here.
Icon and other styles are taken from the primary widget display properties.


|===

`condition` can get four variables:

[%autowidth]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | sourceType in data of widget

| `proportional`
| IntegerStatType
| Integer stat (statistic) entry.
This entry contains stat value, together with domain value.
| objectCollection, auditSearch


| `policySituations`
| Collection<String>
| Collection of policy situations.
| objectCollection


| `object`
| base on displayed object in widget
| Processed object.
| object


| `storedData`
| String
| Stored data from widget.
| widgetData


|===

===== `view`

Last variable of presentation is `view`, this variable is processed for report and we will look on it below.


Example of `presentation`:

[source,xml]
----
<widget>
    ...
    <presentation>
        <dataField>
            <fieldType>value</fieldType>
            <expression>
                <proportional xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:type="c:ProportionalExpressionEvaluatorType">
                    <style>percentage</style>
                </proportional>
            </expression>
        </dataField>
        <dataField>
            <fieldType>unit</fieldType>
            <expression>
                <value>up</value>
            </expression>
        </dataField>
        <variation>
            <condition>
                <script xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:type="c:ScriptExpressionEvaluatorType">
                    <code>
                        policySituations.contains("#resourceHealthDanger")
                    </code>
                </script>
            </condition>
            <display>
                <color>#dd4b39</color>
            </display>
        </variation>
    </presentation>
</widget>
----

=== Object Collection

You can see basic configuration for objectCollection on xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/collections-views/configuration/#object-collection[Object Collection].
For dashboard, we can use policyRule with policyTreshold for define some policySituation.
Example of object collection for resource, which have status UP:

[source,xml]
----
<objectCollection xmlns="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3"
                                  xmlns:q="http://prism.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/query-3"
                                  xmlns:c="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3"
                                  oid="15de186e-1d8c-11e9-a469-8f5d9cfc0259">
    <name>Resources Up</name>
    <assignment>
        <policyRule>
            <policyConstraints>
                <collectionStats>
                    <collection>
                        <interpretation>explicit</interpretation>
                    </collection>
                </collectionStats>
            </policyConstraints>
            <policySituation>#resourceHealthDanger</policySituation>
            <policyThreshold>
                <highWaterMark>
                    <percentage>99.9</percentage>
                </highWaterMark>
            </policyThreshold>
        </policyRule>
    </assignment>
    <type>ResourceType</type>
    <filter>
        <q:equal>
            <q:path>operationalState/lastAvailabilityStatus</q:path>
            <q:value>up</q:value>
        </q:equal>
    </filter>
    <domain>
        <collectionRef oid="00000000-0000-0000-0001-000000000006" type="c:ObjectCollectionType"/>
    </domain>
</objectCollection>
----

Variable _domain_ is a set of object that is "all the things" for this collection.
For example collection of "up resources" will have a domain "all resources".
In this example we use _policyRule_ with _policySituation_, which we can check in variation of widget presentation.
When policyTreshold is met policySituation from policyRule is presented in variation.
_policyThreshold_ have two important variables for us, lowWaterMark and highWaterMark.

lowWaterMark is lower bound of the threshold. Lowest value for which the policy rule is activated. The policy rule will be triggered for all values starting from this value up until the high water mark (closed interval). If no low water mark is specified then the policy rule will be activated for all values up to the high water mark. Policy rule with a threshold that does not have any water marks will never be activated.

highWaterMark is upper bound of the threshold. Highest value for which the policy rule is activated. The policy rule will be triggered for all values starting from low water mark up until this value (closed interval). If no high water mark is specified then the policy rule will be activated for all values that are greater than or equal to high water mark.

Both variables are WaterMarkType type, which contains variables count and percentage.

== Simple example for "enabled users widget"

Now we show very simple example for widget of enabled users, that show only number of enabled users in mP.

As first, we create object collection with filter for users with value `enabled` in attribute activation/effectiveStatus.
[source,xml]
----
<objectCollection oid="00000000-0000-0000-0001-000000147896">
   <name>All enabled users</name>
    <type>UserType</type>
    <filter>
        <equal>
            <path>activation/effectiveStatus</path>
            <value>enabled</value>
        </equal>
    </filter>
</objectCollection>
----
And next we create dashboard with one widget for enabled users.
[source,xml]
----
<dashboard oid="f89709f9-7313-494f-a600-69ea75d95106">
    <name>Example one widget for enabled users</name>
    <display>
        <label>Enabled users</label>
    </display>
    <widget>
        <identifier>enabled-users</identifier>
        <display>
            <label>Enabled users</label>
            <color>#00a65a</color>
            <icon>
                <cssClass>fa fa-user</cssClass>
            </icon>
        </display>
        <data>
            <sourceType>objectCollection</sourceType>
            <collection>
                <collectionRef oid="00000000-0000-0000-0001-000000147896" type="ObjectCollectionType"/>
            </collection>
        </data>
        <presentation>
            <dataField>
                <fieldType>value</fieldType>
                <expression>
                    <proportional>
                        <style>value-only</style>
                    </proportional>
                </expression>
            </dataField>
            <dataField>
                <fieldType>unit</fieldType>
                <expression>
                    <value>enabled</value>
                </expression>
            </dataField>
        </presentation>
    </widget>
</dashboard>
----
You don't forget add new dashboard to admin gui in system configuration and relogin for showing it in left sidebar menu. After opening of new dashboard in GUI you can see our new widget.

image::enabled-users.png[]

== Asynchronous widget

From 4.4 Midpoint support asynchronous widget. When we want to configure it, then we use `displaySourceType` in widget and set it as `widgetData`. We set `sourceType` as `objectCollection` because of redirect to details page and task, which generate stored data.

We need configure dashboard report task, which will be store data to widget. In dashboard report use element `storeExportedWidgetData` for defined where will be stored generated widget data.

For example, we use same case as previous example for enabled users.
We create same object collection.
[source,xml]
----
<objectCollection oid="00000000-0000-0000-0001-000000147896">
   <name>All enabled users</name>
    <type>UserType</type>
    <filter>
        <equal>
            <path>activation/effectiveStatus</path>
            <value>enabled</value>
        </equal>
    </filter>
</objectCollection>
----
As next, we create dashboard with one changes. We add attribute `displaySourceType` with value `widgetData`.
[source,xml]
----
<dashboard oid="f89709f9-7313-494f-a600-69ea75d95106">
    <name>Example one widget for enabled users</name>
    <display>
        <label>Enabled users</label>
    </display>
    <widget>
        <identifier>enabled-users</identifier>
        <display>
            <label>Enabled users</label>
            <color>#00a65a</color>
            <icon>
                <cssClass>fa fa-user</cssClass>
            </icon>
        </display>
        <data>
            <sourceType>objectCollection</sourceType>
            <displaySourceType>widgetData</displaySourceType>
            <collection>
                <collectionRef oid="00000000-0000-0000-0001-000000147896" type="ObjectCollectionType"/>
            </collection>
        </data>
        <presentation>
            <dataField>
                <fieldType>value</fieldType>
                <expression>
                    <proportional>
                        <style>value-only</style>
                    </proportional>
                </expression>
            </dataField>
            <dataField>
                <fieldType>unit</fieldType>
                <expression>
                    <value>enabled</value>
                </expression>
            </dataField>
        </presentation>
    </widget>
</dashboard>
----

Finally, we create report for dashboard.
[source,xml]
----
<report>
    <name>Enabled users report</name>
    <assignment>
        <targetRef oid="00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000170" type="ArchetypeType"/>
    </assignment>
    <dashboard>
        <dashboardRef oid="f89709f9-7313-494f-a600-69ea75d95106" type="DashboardType"/>
        <showOnlyWidgetsTable>true</showOnlyWidgetsTable>
        <storeExportedWidgetData>onlyWidget</storeExportedWidgetData>
    </dashboard>
</report>
----

Now we can run report and midPoint processes source data from dashboard and resulted data writes to widget in dashboard. During next showing of widget in GUI midPoint doesn't process source data but only show `savedData` from xml. We can see same result.

image::enabled-users.png[]

== View

When we create new dashboard, than we can see it in midpoint gui.
Next screenshot is displayed link:https://github.com/Evolveum/midpoint-samples/tree/master/samples/dashboard[dashboard-system-status].

image::dashboard-screenshot.png[]

'''

For whole sample please see link:https://github.com/Evolveum/midpoint-samples/tree/master/samples/dashboard[dashboard-system-status].
