docs/admin-gui/resource-wizard/index.adoc, before:

= Resource wizard
:page-toc: top
:page-since: "4.6"

Resource wizard was complete rewrite and redesign in midPoint version 4.6.

New UI takes form of some panels with choice for specific parts of resource configuration. Specific part of configuration is represented by a  wizard with steps.

== Basic configuration

.Resource catalog
image::step-1-resource-catalog.png[Resource catalog,100%]

First panel of resource wizard allows user to choose connector or template for future resource.
There are two possibilities:

* From template - selecting from the resource template that needs to be preconfigured.
* From scratch - selecting from the available connectors.

When we choose the source, we proceed to a couple of steps for the basic configuration of the resource and the connector.

* First step contains basic configuration for resource.
* When selected connector supports discovery operation, then in second step you have to set mandatory properties for discovering of possible configuration.
* Third step contains contains other possible configuration properties. Some properties can contain suggestions.
* Last step show table with possible object classes.

[%autowidth, cols="a,a", frame=none, grid=none, role="center"]
|===
| image::step-1-basic-conf.png[title=Basic configuration of resource]
| image::step-1-connector-conf-discovery.png[title=Partial configuration for discovery]

| image::step-1-discovered-config.png[title=Discovered configuration]
| image::step-1-schema.png[title=Schema]
|===

After basic configuration of resource we see three tiles for next path.

.Part of resource configuration
image::choice-part-resource.png[Part of resource configuration,100%]

* First tile shows data on resource.

.Data preview
image::data-preview-resource.png[Data preview,100%]

* Second tile leads to the object type configuration.
* After clicking on last tile you will be redirect to resource details page.

== Object type configuration

When we choose the configuration for the object type, we can see a table.

.Table of object type
image::step-2-object-type-table.png[Table of object type,100%]

{empty} +
Detail for configuration of object type:

[%autowidth, cols="a,a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===
| image::step-2-object-type-basic-config.png[title=Basic configuration of object type]
| image::step-2-object-type-resource-data.png[title=Resource data]

2+| image::step-2-object-type-resource-data.png[title=Midpoint data, 50%]
|===

After we configure object type, we can see the tiles for previewing the data and configuring the containers of the selected object type.

.Part of object type configuration
image::choice-part-object-type.png[Part of object type configuration,100%]

.Data preview of object type
image::data-preview-object-type.png[Data preview of object type,100%]

=== Attribute mapping

{empty} +
Inbound mapping:
[%autowidth, cols="a,a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===
| image::step-3-mappings-inbound.png[title=Table of inbound mappings]
| image::step-3-mappings-inbound-detail.png[title=Detail configuration of inbound mapping]
|===

{empty} +
Outbound mapping:
[%autowidth, cols="a,a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===
| image::step-3-mappings-outbound.png[title=Table of outbound mappings]
| image::step-3-mappings-outbound-detail.png[title=Detail configuration of outbound mapping]
|===

{empty} +
Attribute override:
[%autowidth, cols="a,a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===

2+| image::step-3-mappings-override.png[title=Table of attribute overrides]

| image::step-3-mappings-override-detail-basic.png[title=Detail configuration of attribute override]
| image::step-3-mappings-override-detail-limitations.png[title=Detail configuration of attribute override limitations]
|===

=== Synchronization

.Table of synchronization rules
image::step-4-synch.png[Table of synchronization actions,100%]

{empty} +
Detail for synchronization rule:

[%autowidth, cols="a,a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===
| image::step-4-synch-detail-basic.png[title=Basic configuration of synchronizatio rule]
| image::step-4-synch-detail-action.png[title=Action for synchronization rule]

| image::step-4-synch-detail-optional.png[title=optional attributes for synchronization rule]
|
|===

=== Correlation

.Table of correlation rules
image::step-5-correlator-rule.png[Table of correlation rules,100%]

.Table of correlation items for one correlation rule
image::step-5-correlator-item.png[Table of correlation items for one correlation rule,100%]

=== Capabilities

On the capabilities configuration panel, we can see one tile for each supported capability. Some capability we can only enable or disable, but some contains a configuration container. When a capability contains container, and we click on the capability tile, a container configuration popup will appear.

.Capabilities configuration
image::step-6-capabilities.png[Capabilities configuration,100%]

=== Activation

[NOTE]
====
The object type activation configuration will be improved in the next version of midPoint.
====

[%autowidth, cols="a,a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===
| image::step-7-activation-admin-status.png[title=Configuration of administrative status]
| image::step-7-activation-existence.png[title=Configuration of existence]

| image::step-7-activation-valid-from.png[title=Configuration of valid from]
| image::step-7-activation-valid-to.png[title=Configuration of valid to]

| image::step-7-activation-lockout-status.png[title=Configuration of lockout status]
|
|===

=== Credentials

[NOTE]
====
The object type credentials configuration will be improved in the next version of midPoint.
====

.Configuration of credentials
image::step-8-credentials.png[Configuration of credentials, 100%]

=== Associations

.Table of associations
image::step-9-association.png[Table of associations, 100%]

.Detail configuration for association
image::step-9-association-detail.png[Detail configuration for association, 100%]

Commit message:

editing resource wizard doc - adding part for existing resource

docs/admin-gui/resource-wizard/index.adoc, after:

= Resource wizard
:page-toc: top
:page-since: "4.6"

Resource wizard was complete rewrite and redesign in midPoint version 4.6.

New UI takes form of some panels with choice for specific parts of resource configuration. Specific part of configuration is represented by a wizard with steps.

== Basic configuration

.Resource catalog
image::step-1-resource-catalog.png[Resource catalog,100%]

First panel of resource wizard allows user to choose connector or template for future resource.
There are two possibilities:

* From template - selecting from the resource template that needs to be preconfigured.
* From scratch - selecting from the available connectors.

When we choose the source, we proceed to a couple of steps for the basic configuration of the resource and the connector.

* First step contains basic configuration for resource.
* When selected connector supports discovery operation, then in second step you have to set mandatory properties for discovering of possible configuration.
* Third step contains contains other possible configuration properties. Some properties can contain suggestions.
* Last step show table with possible object classes.

[%autowidth, cols="1a,1a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===
| image::step-1-basic-conf.png[link=step-1-basic-conf.png,title=Basic configuration of resource, 50%]
| image::step-1-connector-conf-discovery.png[link=step-1-connector-conf-discovery.png,title=Partial configuration for discovery, 50%]

| image::step-1-discovered-config.png[link=step-1-discovered-config.png,title=Discovered configuration, 50%]
| image::step-1-schema.png[link=step-1-schema.png,title=Schema, 50%]
|===

After basic configuration of resource we see three tiles for next path.

.Parts of resource configuration
image::choice-part-resource.png[Parts of resource configuration,100%]

* First tile shows data on resource.

.Data preview
image::data-preview-resource.png[Data preview,100%]

* Second tile leads to the object type configuration.
* After clicking on last tile you will be redirect to resource details page.

== Object type configuration

When we choose the configuration for the object type, we can see a table.

.Table of object type
image::step-2-object-type-table.png[Table of object type,100%]

{empty} +
Detail for configuration of object type:

[%autowidth, cols="a,a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===
| image::step-2-object-type-basic-config.png[title=Basic configuration of object type]
| image::step-2-object-type-resource-data.png[title=Resource data]

2+| image::step-2-object-type-resource-data.png[title=Midpoint data, 50%]
|===

After we configure object type, we can see the tiles for previewing the data and configuring the containers of the selected object type.

.Parts of object type configuration
image::choice-part-object-type.png[Parts of object type configuration,100%]

.Data preview of object type
image::data-preview-object-type.png[Data preview of object type,100%]

=== Attribute mapping

{empty} +
Inbound mapping:
[%autowidth, cols="a,a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===
| image::step-3-mappings-inbound.png[title=Table of inbound mappings]
| image::step-3-mappings-inbound-detail.png[title=Detail configuration of inbound mapping]
|===

{empty} +
Outbound mapping:
[%autowidth, cols="a,a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===
| image::step-3-mappings-outbound.png[title=Table of outbound mappings]
| image::step-3-mappings-outbound-detail.png[title=Detail configuration of outbound mapping]
|===

{empty} +
Attribute override:
[%autowidth, cols="a,a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===

2+| image::step-3-mappings-override.png[title=Table of attribute overrides]

| image::step-3-mappings-override-detail-basic.png[title=Detail configuration of attribute override]
| image::step-3-mappings-override-detail-limitations.png[title=Detail configuration of attribute override limitations]
|===

=== Synchronization

.Table of synchronization rules
image::step-4-synch.png[Table of synchronization actions,100%]

{empty} +
Detail for synchronization rule:

[%autowidth, cols="a,a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===
| image::step-4-synch-detail-basic.png[title=Basic configuration of synchronizatio rule]
| image::step-4-synch-detail-action.png[title=Action for synchronization rule]

| image::step-4-synch-detail-optional.png[title=optional attributes for synchronization rule]
|
|===

=== Correlation

.Table of correlation rules
image::step-5-correlator-rule.png[Table of correlation rules,100%]

.Table of correlation items for one correlation rule
image::step-5-correlator-item.png[Table of correlation items for one correlation rule,100%]

=== Capabilities

On the capabilities configuration panel, we can see one tile for each supported capability. Some capability we can only enable or disable, but some contains a configuration container. When a capability contains container, and we click on the capability tile, a container configuration popup will appear.

.Capabilities configuration
image::step-6-capabilities.png[Capabilities configuration,100%]

=== Activation

[NOTE]
====
The object type activation configuration will be improved in the next version of midPoint.
====

[%autowidth, cols="a,a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===
| image::step-7-activation-admin-status.png[title=Configuration of administrative status]
| image::step-7-activation-existence.png[title=Configuration of existence]

| image::step-7-activation-valid-from.png[title=Configuration of valid from]
| image::step-7-activation-valid-to.png[title=Configuration of valid to]

| image::step-7-activation-lockout-status.png[title=Configuration of lockout status]
|
|===

=== Credentials

[NOTE]
====
The object type credentials configuration will be improved in the next version of midPoint.
====

.Configuration of credentials
image::step-8-credentials.png[Configuration of credentials, 100%]

=== Associations

.Table of associations
image::step-9-association.png[Table of associations, 100%]

.Detail configuration for association
image::step-9-association-detail.png[Detail configuration for association, 100%]

== Wizard for existing resource

We can use wizard panels to edit existing resource. It's enough if we open the panel for displaying resource objects (accounts/entitlements/generics), select specific object type by intent, and then the buttons for opening the wizard for a specific part of the object type configuration are displayed.

.Resource detail
image::resource-details.png[Resource detail, 100%]
