docs/security/crypto/keystore-configuration.adoc, before:

= Keystore Configuration
:page-wiki-name: Keystore Configuration
:page-wiki-id: 7307570
:page-wiki-metadata-create-user: semancik
:page-wiki-metadata-create-date: 2013-01-31T10:40:16.691+01:00
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-user: chris83527
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-date: 2019-07-18T17:11:01.203+02:00
:page-upkeep-status: yellow

Keystore is a small database that stores cryptographic material.
MidPoint is using keystore to keep encryption keys and certificates.
The most important pieces stored in the keystore are:

* Symmetric key used to encrypt and decrypt passwords in midPoint repository.

* Root and intermediate certificates used to validate SSL certificates of other hosts ("trust anchors") when midPoint acts as a SSL client.
This usually happens during communication to SSL-enabled xref:/connectors/connid/1.x/connector-server/[Connector Server].

MidPoint is using standard Java JCE keystore mechanism.
This may allow moving the keystore to a cryptographic hardware or other forms using Java JCE methods.


== Location and Form

The keystore is normally stored in xref:/midpoint/reference/deployment/midpoint-home-directory/[midPoint home directory] in a `keystore.jceks` file.
It is using JCEKS keystore format because it allows to store both certificates and symmetric encryption keys (as opposed to JKS format).

The symmetric encryption key that is used to encrypt sensitive information in midPoint repository should have alias `default`. This key is used for encryption of any new data.
However, there may be older data in the repository encrypted by keys that were used previously.
There keys will still work for decryption as midpoint remembers the identifier (not alias) of the key that was used for encryption together with the encrypted data.
MidPoint will look for this key by its ID when the data has to be decrypted.
Therefore it is recommended to keep old keys in the keystore to allow decryption of older data.

The default keystore password is `changeit`.

The keystore content is usually inspected and manipulated by using `keytool` utility that is part of Java platform.

*Note:* Some applications servers (notably *Glassfish*) are using their own trust stores.
Therefore the trusted root certificates needs to be imported in their own keystores intead of midPoint keystore.
Please refer to the application server documentation for the details.
For Glassfish the keystore to use is usually `<installRoot>/glassfish/domains/domain1/config/keystore.jks`.


== MidPoint Keystore and JVM Keystore

MidPoint has its own keystore in xref:/midpoint/reference/deployment/midpoint-home-directory/[midPoint home directory] and this keystore is used for all operations that are under midPoint control.
But there are operations that are not under direct midPoint control.
Perhaps the most notable case are the connectors.
Connector framework is by design isolating the connectors from the IDM system.
Therefore connectors does not know anything about midPoint keystore.
When a connector needs a keystore or truststore (store for trusted certificates) it falls back to JVM defalts.
Therefore it means that putting a key to midPoint keystore may not work for these connectors.

*Note:* The isolation mentioned above *does not* apply when using Discovery with remote connector hosts secured with TLS.
In this case the CA certificate(s) or self-signed certificate from the connector host must be imported into the midPoint keystore.
Errors regarding "trustAnchors" and similar are probably due to the certificate not being available in the midPoint keystore.

Perhaps the best thing to do is to override the default JVM keystore/truststore location and point it midPoint keystore.
You can do this with JVM options.
E.g:

[source]
----
-Djavax.net.ssl.trustStore=/var/opt/midpoint/keystore.jceks -Djavax.net.ssl.trustStoreType=jceks
----


== Common Administration Tasks


=== Listing Keystore Content

[source,bash]
----
keytool -keystore keystore.jceks -storetype jceks -storepass changeit -list
----


=== Import Trusted CA Certificate

[source,bash]
----
keytool -keystore keystore.jceks -storetype jceks -storepass changeit -import -alias nlight -trustcacerts -file nlight-cacert.der
----

Commit message:

Keystore password change procedure added to initial documentation.

docs/security/crypto/keystore-configuration.adoc, after:

= Keystore Configuration
:page-wiki-name: Keystore Configuration
:page-wiki-id: 7307570
:page-wiki-metadata-create-user: semancik
:page-wiki-metadata-create-date: 2013-01-31T10:40:16.691+01:00
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-user: chris83527
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-date: 2019-07-18T17:11:01.203+02:00
:page-upkeep-status: yellow

Keystore is a small database that stores cryptographic material.
MidPoint is using keystore to keep encryption keys and certificates.
The most important pieces stored in the keystore are:

* Symmetric key used to encrypt and decrypt passwords in midPoint repository.

* Root and intermediate certificates used to validate SSL certificates of other hosts ("trust anchors") when midPoint acts as a SSL client.
This usually happens during communication to SSL-enabled xref:/connectors/connid/1.x/connector-server/[Connector Server].

MidPoint is using standard Java JCE keystore mechanism.
This may allow moving the keystore to a cryptographic hardware or other forms using Java JCE methods.


== Location and Form

The keystore is normally stored in xref:/midpoint/reference/deployment/midpoint-home-directory/[midPoint home directory] in a `keystore.jceks` file.
It is using JCEKS keystore format because it allows to store both certificates and symmetric encryption keys (as opposed to JKS format).

The symmetric encryption key that is used to encrypt sensitive information in midPoint repository should have alias `default`. This key is used for encryption of any new data.
However, there may be older data in the repository encrypted by keys that were used previously.
There keys will still work for decryption as midpoint remembers the identifier (not alias) of the key that was used for encryption together with the encrypted data.
MidPoint will look for this key by its ID when the data has to be decrypted.
Therefore it is recommended to keep old keys in the keystore to allow decryption of older data.

The default keystore password is `changeit`.

The keystore content is usually inspected and manipulated by using `keytool` utility that is part of Java platform.

*Note:* Some applications servers (notably *Glassfish*) are using their own trust stores.
Therefore the trusted root certificates needs to be imported in their own keystores intead of midPoint keystore.
Please refer to the application server documentation for the details.
For Glassfish the keystore to use is usually `<installRoot>/glassfish/domains/domain1/config/keystore.jks`.


== MidPoint Keystore and JVM Keystore

MidPoint has its own keystore in xref:/midpoint/reference/deployment/midpoint-home-directory/[midPoint home directory] and this keystore is used for all operations that are under midPoint control.
But there are operations that are not under direct midPoint control.
Perhaps the most notable case are the connectors.
Connector framework is by design isolating the connectors from the IDM system.
Therefore connectors does not know anything about midPoint keystore.
When a connector needs a keystore or truststore (store for trusted certificates) it falls back to JVM defalts.
Therefore it means that putting a key to midPoint keystore may not work for these connectors.

*Note:* The isolation mentioned above *does not* apply when using Discovery with remote connector hosts secured with TLS.
In this case the CA certificate(s) or self-signed certificate from the connector host must be imported into the midPoint keystore.
Errors regarding "trustAnchors" and similar are probably due to the certificate not being available in the midPoint keystore.

Perhaps the best thing to do is to override the default JVM keystore/truststore location and point it midPoint keystore.
You can do this with JVM options.
E.g:

[source]
----
-Djavax.net.ssl.trustStore=/var/opt/midpoint/keystore.jceks -Djavax.net.ssl.trustStoreType=jceks
----


== Common Administration Tasks


=== List Keystore Content

[source,bash]
----
keytool -keystore keystore.jceks -storetype jceks -storepass changeit -list
----

[#_change_keystore_password]
=== Change keystore password

Newly generated keystore is protected with initial password `changeit`.

To change it you need to change the password and let the midPoint know to use the new one. No keys are being altered in this operation.

Procedure::

. stop midPoint
. cd to `midpoint.home` directory
. run following command: `keytool -storepasswd -keystore keystore.jceks`
    ** enter the original password `changeit`
    ** enter your new password
. open `config.xml` and replace the value of parameter `/configuration/midpoint/keystore/keyStorePassword`  with the new password
. start midPoint


=== Change encryption key

Please see xref:/midpoint/reference/security/crypto/index.adoc_adding_new_encryption_key[Adding new encryption key].

=== Import Trusted CA Certificate

[source,bash]
----
keytool -keystore keystore.jceks -storetype jceks -storepass changeit -import -alias evolveum -trustcacerts -file evolveum-cacert.der
----
