docs/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/index.adoc, before:

= Attribute Definitions
:page-toc: top

Attribute definitions are part of the xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/object-types/[object type definition] and - partially - of xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/object-classes/[object class adaptation].
They provide more details about handling of attributes that form a particular object type or object class.

== Basic Information

[%autowidth]
|===
| Item name | Description | Further information

| `ref`
| Name of the attribute that is to be defined.
The attribute must exist in the object class (structural or auxiliary).
| See also xref:#_connid_attribute_names[the note on ConnId attribute names].

| `displayName`
| This is a human readable name used in GUI and similar tools.
|

| `description`
| Free-form textual description of the attribute.
|

| `documentation`
| Technical documentation of the attribute.
|

| `lifecycleState`
| Lifecycle state of the attribute definition: whether it is only a draft, or proposed, active, deprecated, archived, and so on.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/concepts/configuration-item-lifecycle/[]

| `displayOrder`
| An order in which this attribute should be displayed relative to other attributes within the same context.
|
|===

== Generic Behavior Configuration

NOTE: This section is applicable to both object types and object classes.

These settings tell midPoint how to access the attribute.
They do not define any transformations to/from midPoint.

[%autowidth]
|===
| Item name | Description | Further information

| `limitations`
| Limits the access to the attribute (reading, creating, modifying).
E.g. administrator can make the attribute read-only even if the connector can both read and write the attribute value.
Can also modify the cardinality (multiplicity) of the attribute.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/limitations/[]

| `matchingRule`
| Specification of a matching rule for an attribute.
Matching rule is used to compare values of the attribute.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/matching-rule/[]

| `secondaryIdentifier`
| Indicated if the attribute should or should not be considered as secondary identifier.
Secondary identifiers are always cached in the repository and are ensured to be always present and unique.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/secondary-identifier/[]

| `fetchStrategy`
| Influences when and how midPoint will fetch this attribute.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/fetch-strategy/[]

| `cached`
| Overrides the caching status (cached or not cached) for this attribute.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/attribute-caching/[]

|===

== Special Considerations when Updating the Attribute

NOTE: This section is applicable to both object types and object classes.

Not all resources are simple data stores.
Many of them carry out hidden processing of the data that are stored to them.
The following items help midPoint to deal with such resources.

[%autowidth]
|===
| Item name | Description | Further information

| `volatility`
| Describes the behavior of this attribute that differs from the "pure data store" expectations.
In particular, it specifies the operations during which this attribute can unexpectedly change, or operations during which the change of this attribute can have an effect on other attributes.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/volatility/[]

| `readReplaceMode`
| If enabled, modifications to this attribute are executed in REPLACE form only.
I.e. if ADD or DELETE VALUE is requested, midPoint will fetch the object state, compute the expected result and write it to the resource object via REPLACE VALUE operation.
This works around some weird connector behavior.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/read-replace-mode/[]

| `modificationPriority`
| Allows modifying the resource object in sequence of "waves", according to priorities specified for individual attributes.
Can be used, e.g., if one needs to switch the object `type` attribute to a specific value, and only after that it's possible to set other attributes.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/modification-priority/[]
|===

== Data Flow from MidPoint to Resource

NOTE: This section is relevant only to attribute definition for object types, not for object classes.

This configuration specifies how to transform the attribute value from midPoint on the fly before it is sent to resource attribute.
The modification value can use other attribute values, constants or anything that can be achieved by an xref:/midpoint/reference/expressions/expressions/[expression].
For example, you may wish to set the resource's `fullname` attribute to the uppercase value of midPoint's `fullName` attribute.
The outbound is what you use for _provisioning_.

[%autowidth]
|===
| Item name | Description | Further information

| `outbound`
| The mapping that defines how the attribute value is created when the account is created or updated.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/expressions/mappings/[]

| `tolerant`
.3+| Specifies whether the attribute tolerates values that are set outside midPoint.
(And which ones.)
.3+| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/tolerance/[]

| `tolerantValuePattern`

| `intolerantValuePattern`

| `exclusiveStrong`
| Drives the behavior of mappings when both strong and normal ones are present.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/exclusive-strong/[]

|===

== Data Flow from Resource to MidPoint

NOTE: This section is relevant only to attribute definition for object types, not for object classes.

This configuration specifies where (to which midPoint attribute) to store the resource attribute value and optionally, how to transform it.
For example, you may wish to store the resource's `full_name_attr` attribute value to midPoint's `fullName` attribute without modification.
The inbound is what you use for _synchronization_.
Please note that there are multiple xref:/midpoint/reference/synchronization/introduction/[Synchronization Flavors] and this configuration applies to all of them.

[%autowidth]
|===
| Item name | Description | Further information

| `inbound`
| Mappings that define how the attribute value is used, e.g., when a change of the account is detected on the resource.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/expressions/mappings/[]

| `correlator`
| Marks the attribute as a xref:/midpoint/reference/correlation/items-correlator/#_short_form[single-item correlator].
| xref:/midpoint/reference/correlation/[]

|===

[NOTE]
====
*A note about inbound mappings' strength*

There is an optional `strength` property to specify if an existing midPoint (focus) item values should be replaced:

* `weak`: the expression will be evaluated only if there is no value in the focus object

* `strong`: the expression will be always evaluated

Currently, the use of the default value (`normal`) is not recommended.
Please specify `strong` instead.

See also xref:/midpoint/reference/expressions/mappings/#_mapping_strength[Mapping strength].
====

// | `displayNameAttribute`
// | Indicated if the content of this attribute should be used as a human-readable name when displaying resource objects of this type.
//CURRENTLY UNUSED.
// |

[#_connid_attribute_names]
== ConnId Special Attribute Names

For some resource, there are two special attributes: `icfs:name` mapped to ConnId pass:[__NAME__] attribute and `icfs:uid` mapped to ConnId pass:[__UID__] attribute.
Please do not confuse them with `ri:name` and/or `ri:uid` attributes.

[NOTE]
====
MidPoint tries to avoid using these generic attribute names.
Hence, if the connector supports it, midPoint uses the real attribute names.
(Like `ri:dn` and `ri:entryUUID` instead of `icfs:name` and `icfs:uid` for the LDAP connector.)

Nevertheless, there are connectors that still use these generic ConnId attributes.
====

[%autowidth]
|===
| Attribute Name | ConnId Attribute Name | Description

| icfs:name
| pass:[__NAME__]
| Unique, mutable account identifier, e.g. Distinguished Name in hierarchical systems like LDAP or a login name in flat resources

| icfs:uid
| pass:[__UID__]
| Unique, immutable account identifier, e.g. Entry UUID in LDAP (not created by you, but generated by LDAP server)

|===

For some resources (connectors) the pass:[__NAME__] and pass:[__UID__] attributes are equivalent.

As a rule of thumb, you can configure an outbound expression for `icfs:name` to define an account identifier (e.g. LDAP's DN attribute).
After the account is created, `icfs:uid` attribute may be used internally for unique resource account identification, but this attribute will be read-only.
There is no need for outbound/inbound expressions for `icfs:uid` attribute.
Change in the `icfs:name` attribute will cause the renaming of the account.

The following is an example of `icfs:uid` attribute configuration:

* the attribute is read-only

* there are no outbound/inbound expressions

[source,xml]
----
<attribute>
    <ref>icfs:uid</ref>
    <displayName>Internal account identifier</displayName>
    <limitations>
        <access>
            <add>false</add>
            <read>true</read>
            <modify>false</modify>
        </access>
    </limitations>
</attribute>
----

// NOTE this example is outdated; the LDAP connector maps DN to ri:dn, not icfs:name any longer
//
// The following is an example of `icfs:name` attribute configuration from OpenDJ advanced sync sample:
//
// * the attribute `icfs:name` can be only created and read (no modification)
//
// * the value of the `icfs:name` attribute will be automatically set to a concatenation of user's login name in midPoint and a static suffix, but only if the resource attribute has no value yet (<strength>weak</strength>)
//
// * no inbound expression is used: the `icfs:name` attribute will not be synchronized to any midPoint attribute when synchronizing
//
// [source,xml]
// ----
// <attribute>
//     <ref>icfs:name</ref>
//     <displayName>Distinguished Name</displayName>
//     <access>create</access>
//     <access>read</access>
//     <outbound>
//         <strength>weak</strength>
//         <source>
//             <path>$user/name</path>
//         </source>
//         <expression>
//             <script>
//                 <!-- No explicit script language was specified. It means that this is Groovy -->
//                 <code>
//                     'uid=' + name + iterationToken + ',ou=people,dc=example,dc=com'
//                 </code>
//             </script>
//         </expression>
//     </outbound>
// </attribute>
// ----

Commit message:

Update more attribute docs pages
(Secondary identifier, read+replace mode and modification priority,
matching rule.)

Work in progress.

Related to MID-10176.

docs/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/index.adoc, after:

= Attribute Definitions
:page-toc: top

Attribute definitions are part of the xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/object-types/[object type definition] and - partially - of xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/object-classes/[object class adaptation].
They provide more details about handling of attributes that form a particular object type or object class.

== Basic Information

[%autowidth]
|===
| Item name | Description | Further information

| `ref`
| Name of the attribute that is to be defined.
The attribute must exist in the object class (structural or auxiliary).
| See also xref:#_connid_attribute_names[the note on ConnId attribute names].

| `displayName`
| This is a human readable name used in GUI and similar tools.
|

| `description`
| Free-form textual description of the attribute.
|

| `documentation`
| Technical documentation of the attribute.
|

| `lifecycleState`
| Lifecycle state of the attribute definition: whether it is only a draft, or proposed, active, deprecated, archived, and so on.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/concepts/configuration-item-lifecycle/[]

| `displayOrder`
| An order in which this attribute should be displayed relative to other attributes within the same context.
|
|===

== Generic Behavior Configuration

NOTE: This section is applicable to both object types and object classes.

These settings tell midPoint how to access the attribute.
They do not define any transformations to/from midPoint.

[%autowidth]
|===
| Item name | Description | Further information

| `limitations`
| Limits the access to the attribute (reading, creating, modifying).
E.g. administrator can make the attribute read-only even if the connector can both read and write the attribute value.
Can also modify the cardinality (multiplicity) of the attribute.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/limitations/[]

| `matchingRule`
| Specification of a matching rule for an attribute, if the rule provided by the connector is not suitable.
Matching rules are used to compare values of the attribute.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/concepts/matching-rules/[]

| `secondaryIdentifier`
| Indicated if the attribute should or should not be considered as secondary identifier.
Secondary identifiers are always cached in the repository and are ensured to be always present and unique.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/secondary-identifier/[]

| `fetchStrategy`
| Influences when and how midPoint will fetch this attribute.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/fetch-strategy/[]

| `cached`
| Overrides the caching status (cached or not cached) for this attribute.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/attribute-caching/[]

|===

== Special Considerations when Updating the Attribute

NOTE: This section is applicable to both object types and object classes.

Not all resources are simple data stores.
Many of them carry out hidden processing of the data that are stored to them.
The following items help midPoint to deal with such resources.

[%autowidth]
|===
| Item name | Description | Further information

| `volatility`
| Describes the behavior of this attribute that differs from the "pure data store" expectations.
In particular, it specifies the operations during which this attribute can unexpectedly change, or operations during which the change of this attribute can have an effect on other attributes.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/volatility/[]

| `readReplaceMode`
| If enabled, modifications to this attribute are executed in REPLACE form only.
I.e. if ADD or DELETE VALUE is requested, midPoint will fetch the object state, compute the expected result and write it to the resource object via REPLACE VALUE operation.
This works around some weird connector behavior.
.2+| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/read-replace-and-modification-priority/[]

| `modificationPriority`
| Allows modifying the resource object in sequence of "waves", according to priorities specified for individual attributes.
Can be used, e.g., if one needs to switch the object `type` attribute to a specific value, and only after that it's possible to set other attributes.
|===

== Data Flow from MidPoint to Resource

NOTE: This section is relevant only to attribute definition for object types, not for object classes.

This configuration specifies how to transform the attribute value from midPoint on the fly before it is sent to resource attribute.
The modification value can use other attribute values, constants or anything that can be achieved by an xref:/midpoint/reference/expressions/expressions/[expression].
For example, you may wish to set the resource's `fullname` attribute to the uppercase value of midPoint's `fullName` attribute.
The outbound is what you use for _provisioning_.

[%autowidth]
|===
| Item name | Description | Further information

| `outbound`
| The mapping that defines how the attribute value is created when the account is created or updated.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/expressions/mappings/[]

| `tolerant`
.3+| Specifies whether the attribute tolerates values that are set outside midPoint.
(And which ones.)
.3+| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/tolerance/[]

| `tolerantValuePattern`

| `intolerantValuePattern`

| `exclusiveStrong`
| Drives the behavior of mappings when both strong and normal ones are present.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/exclusive-strong/[]

|===

== Data Flow from Resource to MidPoint

NOTE: This section is relevant only to attribute definition for object types, not for object classes.

This configuration specifies where (to which midPoint attribute) to store the resource attribute value and optionally, how to transform it.
For example, you may wish to store the resource's `full_name_attr` attribute value to midPoint's `fullName` attribute without modification.
The inbound is what you use for _synchronization_.
Please note that there are multiple xref:/midpoint/reference/synchronization/introduction/[Synchronization Flavors] and this configuration applies to all of them.

[%autowidth]
|===
| Item name | Description | Further information

| `inbound`
| Mappings that define how the attribute value is used, e.g., when a change of the account is detected on the resource.
| xref:/midpoint/reference/expressions/mappings/[]

| `correlator`
| Marks the attribute as a xref:/midpoint/reference/correlation/items-correlator/#_short_form[single-item correlator].
| xref:/midpoint/reference/correlation/[]

|===

[NOTE]
====
*A note about inbound mappings' strength*

There is an optional `strength` property to specify if an existing midPoint (focus) item values should be replaced:

* `weak`: the expression will be evaluated only if there is no value in the focus object

* `strong`: the expression will be always evaluated

Currently, the use of the default value (`normal`) is not recommended.
Please specify `strong` instead.

See also xref:/midpoint/reference/expressions/mappings/#_mapping_strength[Mapping strength].
====

// | `displayNameAttribute`
// | Indicated if the content of this attribute should be used as a human-readable name when displaying resource objects of this type.
//CURRENTLY UNUSED.
// |

[#_connid_attribute_names]
== ConnId Special Attribute Names

For some resource, there are two special attributes: `icfs:name` mapped to ConnId pass:[__NAME__] attribute and `icfs:uid` mapped to ConnId pass:[__UID__] attribute.
Please do not confuse them with `ri:name` and/or `ri:uid` attributes.

[NOTE]
====
MidPoint tries to avoid using these generic attribute names.
Hence, if the connector supports it, midPoint uses the real attribute names.
(Like `ri:dn` and `ri:entryUUID` instead of `icfs:name` and `icfs:uid` for the LDAP connector.)

Nevertheless, there are connectors that still use these generic ConnId attributes.
====

[%autowidth]
|===
| Attribute Name | ConnId Attribute Name | Description

| icfs:name
| pass:[__NAME__]
| Unique, mutable account identifier, e.g. Distinguished Name in hierarchical systems like LDAP or a login name in flat resources

| icfs:uid
| pass:[__UID__]
| Unique, immutable account identifier, e.g. Entry UUID in LDAP (not created by you, but generated by LDAP server)

|===

For some resources (connectors) the pass:[__NAME__] and pass:[__UID__] attributes are equivalent.

As a rule of thumb, you can configure an outbound expression for `icfs:name` to define an account identifier (e.g. LDAP's DN attribute).
After the account is created, `icfs:uid` attribute may be used internally for unique resource account identification, but this attribute will be read-only.
There is no need for outbound/inbound expressions for `icfs:uid` attribute.
Change in the `icfs:name` attribute will cause the renaming of the account.

The following is an example of `icfs:uid` attribute configuration:

* the attribute is read-only

* there are no outbound/inbound expressions

[source,xml]
----
<attribute>
    <ref>icfs:uid</ref>
    <displayName>Internal account identifier</displayName>
    <limitations>
        <access>
            <add>false</add>
            <read>true</read>
            <modify>false</modify>
        </access>
    </limitations>
</attribute>
----

// NOTE this example is outdated; the LDAP connector maps DN to ri:dn, not icfs:name any longer
//
// The following is an example of `icfs:name` attribute configuration from OpenDJ advanced sync sample:
//
// * the attribute `icfs:name` can be only created and read (no modification)
//
// * the value of the `icfs:name` attribute will be automatically set to a concatenation of user's login name in midPoint and a static suffix, but only if the resource attribute has no value yet (<strength>weak</strength>)
//
// * no inbound expression is used: the `icfs:name` attribute will not be synchronized to any midPoint attribute when synchronizing
//
// [source,xml]
// ----
// <attribute>
//     <ref>icfs:name</ref>
//     <displayName>Distinguished Name</displayName>
//     <access>create</access>
//     <access>read</access>
//     <outbound>
//         <strength>weak</strength>
//         <source>
//             <path>$user/name</path>
//         </source>
//         <expression>
//             <script>
//                 <!-- No explicit script language was specified. It means that this is Groovy -->
//                 <code>
//                     'uid=' + name + iterationToken + ',ou=people,dc=example,dc=com'
//                 </code>
//             </script>
//         </expression>
//     </outbound>
// </attribute>
// ----
