docs/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/secondary-identifier.adoc, before:

= Secondary Identifier

Indicated if the attribute should be considered as secondary identifier.
If set to `true`, this attribute is assumed and enforced to be unique.
Also, it is stored in repository and used for example by synchronization (correlation rule), consistency mechanism, etc.

This can also be used to disable the secondary identifier - for instance when the attribute used as a secondary identifier by default is not unique.
Normally, `icfs:name` is chosen as a secondary identifier, however ConnId contract for it doesn't mandate its uniqueness.
If the resource doesn't provide unique name it's better to let midPoint know about it:

.Listing 6. Disabling `icfs:name` as the secondary identifier
[source,xml]
----
<attribute>
    <ref>icfs:name</ref>
    <!-- Name is not unique, so we need to disable this as a secondary identifier. -->
    <secondaryIdentifier>false</secondaryIdentifier>
    ... the rest of the attribute config, mappings, etc.
</attribute>
----

[NOTE]
This may work fine, but the result is not guaranteed.
Some scenarios may require secondary identifier.

Commit message:

Update more attribute docs pages
(Secondary identifier, read+replace mode and modification priority,
matching rule.)

Work in progress.

Related to MID-10176.

docs/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/attributes/secondary-identifier.adoc, after:

= Secondary Identifier

Indicated if the attribute should be considered as a xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-schema/#_secondary_identifier[secondary identifier] or not.

If set to `true`, this attribute is assumed and enforced to be unique and is always stored in the repository.
For example, `ri:sAMAccountName` in Active Directory can be promoted to be the secondary identifier in this way.

This configuration property can also be used to _disable_ the secondary identifier.
It is useful in situations when the connector marks an attribute - typically, `icfs:name` - as a secondary identifier, but the attribute is not really unique.
(ConnId contract for this attribute doesn't mandate its uniqueness.)
This is a problem.

MidPoint must be configured to stop using this attribute as a secondary identifier:

.Disabling `icfs:name` as the secondary identifier
[source,xml]
----
<attribute>
    <ref>icfs:name</ref>
    <!-- Name is not unique, so we need to disable this as a secondary identifier. -->
    <secondaryIdentifier>false</secondaryIdentifier>
    ... the rest of the attribute config, mappings, etc.
</attribute>
----

[NOTE]
This may work fine, but the result is not guaranteed.
Some scenarios may require secondary identifier.
