docs/security/authorization/admin-gui.adoc, before:

= GUI Authorizations
:page-wiki-name: GUI Authorizations
:page-wiki-id: 15859800
:page-wiki-metadata-create-user: semancik
:page-wiki-metadata-create-date: 2014-06-30T12:30:36.256+02:00
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-user: katkav
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-date: 2020-03-27T20:17:57.504+01:00
:page-upkeep-status: yellow
:page-toc: top

In the midPoint, we now support these GUI actions:

== Overall Administration Actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#all
| All GUI pages
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#home
| Administration dashboard (including the actions)
| covers also #dashboard and #myPasswords

|
| All administration pages for users (including the actions)
|

|
| All administration pages for resources (including the actions)
|

|
| All administration pages for roles (including the actions)
|

|
| All administration configuration pages (including the actions)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#allWorkItems
| All administration pages for work items (including the actions)
| Since 4.0

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#reportsAll
| All administration pages for reports (including the actions)
|

|
| All administration pages for tasks (including the actions)
|

|
| All administration pages for org.
structure (including the actions)
|

|
| All pages for access certification (including actions)
| Since 3.4

|
| All pages for archetypes
| Since 4.0

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminAssign
| Assign menu item authorization on the Assignment tab
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminUnassign
| Unassign menu item authorization on the Assignment tab
|



| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminUnassignAllMembers
| Unassign all members menu item authorization on the Assignment tab
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#previewChanges
| Authorization required to access preview changes page.
The authorization is also check while deciding if previewButton should be shown.
| Since 4.1

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminCSVexport
| 'Export csv' component authorization on the object list pages (e.g. 'Export csv' toolbar button on the All Users page)
|

|===

== Self-service Actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#selfAll
| All self-service pages
| Since 3.3

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#selfDashboard
| Self-service Home
| Since 3.3

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#selfProfile
| Self-service profile
| Since 3.3

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#selfCredentials
| Self-service credentials
| Since 3.3

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#selfRequestRole
| Self-service request a role
| 3.4-3.5.x, not supported in 3.6+

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#selfRequestAssignmentDEPRECATED
| Self-service request a role
| appeared in 3.6 +
deprecated since 4.0.1 +
use #selfRequestAssignments instead

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#selfRequestAssignments
| Self-service request a role
| Since 3.6

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#postAuthentication
| Post-authentication
| Since 3.8.1

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#assignmentDetails
| Self-service assignment details
|

|===

== Administration Dashboard Actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#dashboard
| Administration dashboard
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#myPasswords
| My passwords
| Page removed in 3.3, see self-service credentials page instead

|===

== User actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#users
| List users
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#user
| Create user
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#userDetails
| Edit user
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#findUsers
| Find users
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#usersView
| Showing menu items for xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/collections-views/[views] that are configured for users.
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#userHistory
| User historical data viewer page. The authorization check is also performed to determine whether the "View object data" button should be displayed on the history page.
|

|===

== Resource actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#resources
| List resources
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#resource
| Create resource (xml editor)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#resourceDetails
| Details of resource
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#resourceEdit
| Edit resource
| Resource Wizard

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#resourcesAccount
| Listing accounts on resource
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#resourceWizard
| Resource wizard
|

|===

== Role actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#roles
| List roles
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#role
| Create role
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#roleDetails
| Details of role (including editing)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminAssignMember
| Assign/manage role members (role/service/policy details, "Members" tab)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminAddMember
| Create new member (role/service/policy details, "Members" tab)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminUnassignMember
| Unassign member (role/service/policy details, "Members" tab)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminRecomputeMember
| Recompute member (role/service/policy details, "Members" tab)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminAssignGovernance
| Assign member (role/service/policy details, "Governance" tab)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminUnassignGovernance
| Unssign member (role/service/policy details, "Governance" tab)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminAddGovernance
| Create new member (role/service/policy details, "Governance" tab)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#rolesView
| Showing menu items for xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/collections-views/[views] that are configured for roles.
| Since 4.0.1

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#roleHistory
| Role historical data viewer page. The authorization check is also performed to determine whether the "View object data" button should be displayed on the history page.
|

|===

== Organization actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgAll
| TODO: #orgTree + #orgStruct?
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgTree
| Org tree hierarchy
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgUnit
| Org. unit details (including editing) and New org. link (based on #read, #modify, #add and #delete model authorizations)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminAssignOrgMember
| Authorization for Assign menu item on the org Managers and Members panels (e.g. Assign Managers, Assign Members)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminUnassignOrgMember
| Authorization for Unassign menu item on the org Managers and Members panels (e.g. Unassign selected members)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminAddOrgMember
| Authorization for Create menu item on the org Managers and Members panels (e.g. Create manager, Create member)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminDeleteOrgMember
| Authorization for Delete menu item on the org Managers and Members panels (e.g. Delete all managers, Delete member, Delete all (focus) members)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminRecomputeOrgMember
| Authorization for Recompute menu item on the org Managers and Members panels (e.g. Recompute all managers, Recompute selected members, Recompute direct members, Recompute all members)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminOrgMove
| Authorization for Move organization menu item
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminOrgMakeRoot
| Authorization for Make root organization menu item
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgUnitHistory
| Org unit historical data viewer page. The authorization check is also performed to determine whether the "View object data" button should be displayed on the history page.
|

|===

== Service actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#services
| List services
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#service
| Create service
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#serviceDetails
| Details of service
| Since 4.4.2

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#serviceHistory
| Service historical data viewer page. The authorization check is also performed to determine whether the "View object data" button should be displayed on the history page.
|

|===

== Policy actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#policiesAll
| All actions related to policies
| Since 4.9

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#policies
| List policies
| Since 4.9

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#policy
| Create policy
| Since 4.9

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#policyDetails
| Details of policy
| Since 4.9

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#policyHistory
| Policy historical data viewer page. The authorization check is also performed to determine whether the "View object data" button should be displayed on the history page.
| Since 4.9

|===

== Configuration actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#debugs
| Repository objects
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#debug
| Edit repository object
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#configImport
| Import object
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#configLogging
| Logging settings
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#configSystemConfiguration
| System configuration
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#configAbout
| About system, self tests for repository and provisioning
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#configSyncAccounts
| Accounts synchronization information
|

|===

== Case actions
[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#cases
| All cases. If only this authorization is defined, no views (My Cases, All Approvals) will be shown in the sidebar menu.
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#casesView
| Showing menu items for xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/collections-views/[views] that are configured for cases.
|

|===

== Work items actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#allWorkItems
| List work items
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#myWorkItems
| My work items
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#workItem
| Edit work item
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#attorneyWorkItems
| Attorney items
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#claimableWorkItems
| Items claimable by me
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#allRequests
| All requests
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#myRequests
| My requests
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#requestsAboutMe
| Requests about me
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#workItemsProcessInstance
| Process instance (Work items)
|

|===

== Report actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#reports
| List reports
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#createdReports
| Created reports
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-model-3#auditRead
| Reading audit log data
| since 3.5

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#auditLogViewer
| Audit log viewer page
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#auditLogDetails
| Audit log details viewer page
| since 4.7

|===

== Task actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#tasks
| List tasks
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#tasksView
| Showing menu items for xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/collections-views/[views] that are configured for tasks.
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#taskAdd
| Create task
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#taskDetails
| Task details
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#task
| Edit task
|

|===

== Org. structure actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgStruct
| Org. tree menu
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgTree
| Org. tree hierarchy
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgUnit
| New org unit link
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgDetails
| Edit Org Unit
| Since 4.4.3

|===

== Archetype actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#archetypes
| List archetypes
| Since 4.0

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#archetype
| Edit archetype
| Since 4.0

|===

== Schemas

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#schemasAll
| All actions related to schemas
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#schemas
| List schemas
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#schema
| Create schema
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#schemaDetails
| Details of schema
|

|===

== Access certification actions

Please see xref:/midpoint/reference/roles-policies/certification/authorization/[Access Certification Security] for detailed list.

== See also:

* xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/admin-gui-config/[Admin GUI Configuration]

Commit message:

Fixing authorizations actions for "all" operations and for cases.

docs/security/authorization/admin-gui.adoc, after:

= GUI Authorizations
:page-wiki-name: GUI Authorizations
:page-wiki-id: 15859800
:page-wiki-metadata-create-user: semancik
:page-wiki-metadata-create-date: 2014-06-30T12:30:36.256+02:00
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-user: katkav
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-date: 2020-03-27T20:17:57.504+01:00
:page-upkeep-status: yellow
:page-toc: top

In the midPoint, we now support these GUI actions:

== Overall Administration Actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#all
| All GUI pages
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#home
| Administration dashboard (including the actions)
| covers also #dashboard and #myPasswords

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#usersAll
| All administration pages for users (including the actions)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#resourcesAll
| All administration pages for resources (including the actions)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#rolesAll
| All administration pages for roles (including the actions)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#configurationAll
| All administration configuration pages (including the actions)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#allWorkItems
| All administration pages for work items (including the actions)
| Since 4.0

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#reportsAll
| All administration pages for reports (including the actions)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#tasksAll
| All administration pages for tasks (including the actions)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgAll
| All administration pages for org.
structure (including the actions)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#certificationAll
| All pages for access certification (including actions)
| Since 3.4

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#archetypesAll
| All pages for archetypes
| Since 4.0

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminAssign
| Assign menu item authorization on the Assignment tab
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminUnassign
| Unassign menu item authorization on the Assignment tab
|



| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminUnassignAllMembers
| Unassign all members menu item authorization on the Assignment tab
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#previewChanges
| Authorization required to access preview changes page.
The authorization is also check while deciding if previewButton should be shown.
| Since 4.1

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminCSVexport
| 'Export csv' component authorization on the object list pages (e.g. 'Export csv' toolbar button on the All Users page)
|

|===

== Self-service Actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#selfAll
| All self-service pages
| Since 3.3

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#selfDashboard
| Self-service Home
| Since 3.3

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#selfProfile
| Self-service profile
| Since 3.3

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#selfCredentials
| Self-service credentials
| Since 3.3

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#selfRequestRole
| Self-service request a role
| 3.4-3.5.x, not supported in 3.6+

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#selfRequestAssignment (DEPRECATED)
| Self-service request a role
| appeared in 3.6 +
deprecated since 4.0.1 +
use #selfRequestAssignments instead

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#selfRequestAssignments
| Self-service request a role
| Since 3.6

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#postAuthentication
| Post-authentication
| Since 3.8.1

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#assignmentDetails
| Self-service assignment details
|

|===

== Administration Dashboard Actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#dashboard
| Administration dashboard
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#myPasswords
| My passwords
| Page removed in 3.3, see self-service credentials page instead

|===

== User actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#users
| List users
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#user
| Create user
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#userDetails
| Edit user
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#findUsers
| Find users
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#usersView
| Showing menu items for xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/collections-views/[views] that are configured for users.
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#userHistory
| User historical data viewer page. The authorization check is also performed to determine whether the "View object data" button should be displayed on the history page.
|

|===

== Resource actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#resources
| List resources
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#resource
| Create resource (xml editor)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#resourceDetails
| Details of resource
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#resourceEdit
| Edit resource
| Resource Wizard

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#resourcesAccount
| Listing accounts on resource
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#resourceWizard
| Resource wizard
|

|===

== Role actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#roles
| List roles
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#role
| Create role
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#roleDetails
| Details of role (including editing)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminAssignMember
| Assign/manage role members (role/service/policy details, "Members" tab)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminAddMember
| Create new member (role/service/policy details, "Members" tab)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminUnassignMember
| Unassign member (role/service/policy details, "Members" tab)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminRecomputeMember
| Recompute member (role/service/policy details, "Members" tab)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminAssignGovernance
| Assign member (role/service/policy details, "Governance" tab)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminUnassignGovernance
| Unssign member (role/service/policy details, "Governance" tab)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminAddGovernance
| Create new member (role/service/policy details, "Governance" tab)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#rolesView
| Showing menu items for xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/collections-views/[views] that are configured for roles.
| Since 4.0.1

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#roleHistory
| Role historical data viewer page. The authorization check is also performed to determine whether the "View object data" button should be displayed on the history page.
|

|===

== Organization actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgAll
| TODO: #orgTree + #orgStruct?
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgTree
| Org tree hierarchy
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgUnit
| Org. unit details (including editing) and New org. link (based on #read, #modify, #add and #delete model authorizations)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminAssignOrgMember
| Authorization for Assign menu item on the org Managers and Members panels (e.g. Assign Managers, Assign Members)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminUnassignOrgMember
| Authorization for Unassign menu item on the org Managers and Members panels (e.g. Unassign selected members)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminAddOrgMember
| Authorization for Create menu item on the org Managers and Members panels (e.g. Create manager, Create member)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminDeleteOrgMember
| Authorization for Delete menu item on the org Managers and Members panels (e.g. Delete all managers, Delete member, Delete all (focus) members)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminRecomputeOrgMember
| Authorization for Recompute menu item on the org Managers and Members panels (e.g. Recompute all managers, Recompute selected members, Recompute direct members, Recompute all members)
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminOrgMove
| Authorization for Move organization menu item
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#adminOrgMakeRoot
| Authorization for Make root organization menu item
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgUnitHistory
| Org unit historical data viewer page. The authorization check is also performed to determine whether the "View object data" button should be displayed on the history page.
|

|===

== Service actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#services
| List services
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#service
| Create service
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#serviceDetails
| Details of service
| Since 4.4.2

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#serviceHistory
| Service historical data viewer page. The authorization check is also performed to determine whether the "View object data" button should be displayed on the history page.
|

|===

== Policy actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#policiesAll
| All actions related to policies
| Since 4.9

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#policies
| List policies
| Since 4.9

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#policy
| Create policy
| Since 4.9

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#policyDetails
| Details of policy
| Since 4.9

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#policyHistory
| Policy historical data viewer page. The authorization check is also performed to determine whether the "View object data" button should be displayed on the history page.
| Since 4.9

|===

== Configuration actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#debugs
| Repository objects
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#debug
| Edit repository object
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#configImport
| Import object
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#configLogging
| Logging settings
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#configSystemConfiguration
| System configuration
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#configAbout
| About system, self tests for repository and provisioning
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#configSyncAccounts
| Accounts synchronization information
|

|===

== Case actions
[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#cases
| All cases. If only this authorization is defined, no views (My Cases, All Approvals) will be shown in the sidebar menu.
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#casesView
| Showing menu items for xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/collections-views/[views] that are configured for cases.
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#case
| Edit case (allowing to display case details including child cases and work items)
|

|===

== Work items actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#allWorkItems
| List work items
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#myWorkItems
| My work items
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#workItem
| Edit work item
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#attorneyWorkItems
| Attorney items
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#claimableWorkItems
| Items claimable by me
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#allRequests
| All requests
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#myRequests
| My requests
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#requestsAboutMe
| Requests about me
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#workItemsProcessInstance
| Process instance (Work items)
|

|===

== Report actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#reports
| List reports
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#createdReports
| Created reports
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-model-3#auditRead
| Reading audit log data
| since 3.5

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#auditLogViewer
| Audit log viewer page
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#auditLogDetails
| Audit log details viewer page
| since 4.7

|===

== Task actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#tasks
| List tasks
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#tasksView
| Showing menu items for xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/collections-views/[views] that are configured for tasks.
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#taskAdd
| Create task
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#taskDetails
| Task details
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#task
| Edit task
|

|===

== Org. structure actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgStruct
| Org. tree menu
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgTree
| Org. tree hierarchy
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgUnit
| New org unit link
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#orgDetails
| Edit Org Unit
| Since 4.4.3

|===

== Archetype actions

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#archetypes
| List archetypes
| Since 4.0

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#archetype
| Edit archetype
| Since 4.0

|===

== Schemas

[%autowidth]
|===
| Action | Allowed access to page | Note

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#schemasAll
| All actions related to schemas
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#schemas
| List schemas
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#schema
| Create schema
|

| http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/authorization-ui-3#schemaDetails
| Details of schema
|

|===

== Access certification actions

Please see xref:/midpoint/reference/roles-policies/certification/authorization/[Access Certification Security] for detailed list.

== See also:

* xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/admin-gui-config/[Admin GUI Configuration]
