docs/diag/performance.adoc, before:

= Performance Tuning
:page-since: 4.9
:page-upkeep-status: green

MidPoint 4.9 introduced new functionality, intended for ease of use, which is enabled by default and may impact performance of existing deployments.
This new functionality is not necessary for some deployments (depending on their configuration) and can be fine-tuned or turned off to gain performance.


== Default provenance metadata for multivalues

MidPoint 4.9 has provenance metadata enabled by default for multivalue properties, which are created / edited by mappings.
This functionality simplifies writing of mappings and makes default behaviour more predictable, where mappings can only remove values, they emmited.

=== Impact

The provenance metadata for multivalue properties results in larger data structures (instead of storing just value, identifiers of resource and mapping, which emitted this value).
This increases memory consumption, storage consumption at database level and processing time necessary for creation, serialization and deserialization of these metadata.

The performance impact increases with number of multivalue properties in use and mappings.

=== Mitigation

If deployment does use mappings for multivalue metadata, but all such mappings has custom range defined, default provenance metadata can be turned off in system configuration.
The option for disabling provenance metadata by default is `internals/valueMetadata/disableDefaultMultivalueProvenance`

[source, xml]
----
<systemConfiguration>
    ...
    <internals>
        <valueMetadata>
            <disableDefaultMultivalueProvenance>true</disableDefaultMultivalueProvenance>
        </valueMetadata>
    </internals>
    ...
</systemConfiguration>
----

[#_shadow_caching]
== Shadow Caching

Since 4.9, the xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/attribute-caching/[shadow caching] is enabled by default.
It means that shadow attributes and other items (like activation or credentials) are stored in midPoint repository.
This improves the performance and reliability for slow and/or unreliable resources, especially when dealing with ones in cloud.
It also broadens possibilities related to reporting, as the required data are stored right in midPoint.

=== Impact

However, storing additional information in midPoint repository has a performance impact.

First, there is more data to be stored, so the database tables are larger.
When processing this data, more RAM and processing power (CPU) is needed.
Finally, if the caching is enabled, the maintenance of caching metadata (in particular the `retrievalTimestamp`) costs additional midPoint repository update on each read operation executed against the resource - even if there is no real change of the data on the resource.

This impact is more profound if the cache is used in the default mode (`useFresh`), where it is updated, but not used for regular operation - only for reporting.

=== Mitigation

For slow resources, we suggest turning on `useCachedOrFresh` mode.
It will reduce the number of resource read operations, as well as the number of corresponding updates of `retrievalTimestamp` in midPoint repository.

For fast resources with the need of instant reporting, we suggest using the (experimental) feature that turns off the maintenance of the `retrievalTimestamp` property:

[source, xml]
----
<resource>
    ...
    <caching>
        ...
        <retrievalTimestampMaintenance>false</retrievalTimestampMaintenance>
    </caching>
</resource>
----

(It can be done at any level: system configuration, resource, or object type.)

Finally, if the shadow caching is not needed, it is recommended to turn it off.

[#_database_tuning]
== Database performance tuning

If you are using native repository, and you observe that some action sometimes takes an unusual amount of time to finish, you may consider to try following Postgres tuning.

=== Postgres autovacuum nap time

Some midPoint actions may cause a big amount of inserts, followed by complex select (e.g. Opening certification campaign stage).
In such situations, it may happen that the select will be executed before Postgres will even detect the need for `VACUUM`/`ANALYZE` operations (caused by big number of inserts).
From our observations, such select could sometimes take a very long time (if at all) to finish.

Even though we try to optimize such cases in the code, it sometimes may be necessary to mitigate this issues by lowering the autovacuum nap time Postgres configuration option.
This property says, how big delay should be between two subsequent checks for need of `VACUUM`/`ANALYZE` operations.
The default is 1 minute.
We suggest you to experiment with lowering of that value to tens of seconds.

NOTE: The autovacuum nap time does not directly affect the execution of the `VACUUM`/`ANALYZE` operations.
It only affects how often the check for need of `VACUUM`/`ANALYZE` will run.
So indirectly, it *MAY* but doesn't *HAVE TO* cause bigger number of `VACUUM`/`ANALYZE` executions.

Autovacuum nap time can be configured in the postgresql.conf file in the AUTOVACUUM section:
[source,conf]
----
autovacuum_naptime = 10s
----

WARNING: The autovacuum nap time is considered per database.
That means, if your Postgres instance hosts more databases, each of those databases will be checked for need of `VACUUM`/`ANALYZE` once per period.
Consequently, if the Postgres instance have N databases, there will be a check executed each `naptime/N` seconds, each time for different database.

Commit message:

Make operation execution recording a regular feature
This commit clears the "experimental" flag, documents the property,
and makes the setting a part of the initial system configuration.

(cherry picked from commit 44e08e7a3f752a073214d7e493dd03995c8565ab)

docs/diag/performance.adoc, after:

= Performance Tuning
:page-since: 4.9
:page-upkeep-status: green

MidPoint 4.9 introduced new functionality, intended for ease of use, which is enabled by default and may impact performance of existing deployments.
This new functionality is not necessary for some deployments (depending on their configuration) and can be fine-tuned or turned off to gain performance.


== Default provenance metadata for multivalues

MidPoint 4.9 has provenance metadata enabled by default for multivalue properties, which are created / edited by mappings.
This functionality simplifies writing of mappings and makes default behaviour more predictable, where mappings can only remove values, they emmited.

=== Impact

The provenance metadata for multivalue properties results in larger data structures (instead of storing just value, identifiers of resource and mapping, which emitted this value).
This increases memory consumption, storage consumption at database level and processing time necessary for creation, serialization and deserialization of these metadata.

The performance impact increases with number of multivalue properties in use and mappings.

=== Mitigation

If deployment does use mappings for multivalue metadata, but all such mappings has custom range defined, default provenance metadata can be turned off in system configuration.
The option for disabling provenance metadata by default is `internals/valueMetadata/disableDefaultMultivalueProvenance`

[source, xml]
----
<systemConfiguration>
    ...
    <internals>
        <valueMetadata>
            <disableDefaultMultivalueProvenance>true</disableDefaultMultivalueProvenance>
        </valueMetadata>
    </internals>
    ...
</systemConfiguration>
----

[#_shadow_caching]
== Shadow Caching

Since 4.9, the xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/attribute-caching/[shadow caching] is enabled by default.
It means that shadow attributes and other items (like activation or credentials) are stored in midPoint repository.
This improves the performance and reliability for slow and/or unreliable resources, especially when dealing with ones in cloud.
It also broadens possibilities related to reporting, as the required data are stored right in midPoint.

=== Impact

However, storing additional information in midPoint repository has a performance impact.

First, there is more data to be stored, so the database tables are larger.
When processing this data, more RAM and processing power (CPU) is needed.
Finally, if the caching is enabled, the maintenance of caching metadata (in particular the `retrievalTimestamp`) costs additional midPoint repository update on each read operation executed against the resource - even if there is no real change of the data on the resource.

This impact is more profound if the cache is used in the default mode (`useFresh`), where it is updated, but not used for regular operation - only for reporting.

=== Mitigation

For slow resources, we suggest turning on `useCachedOrFresh` mode.
It will reduce the number of resource read operations, as well as the number of corresponding updates of `retrievalTimestamp` in midPoint repository.

For fast resources with the need of instant reporting, we suggest using the (experimental) feature that turns off the maintenance of the `retrievalTimestamp` property:

[source, xml]
----
<resource>
    ...
    <caching>
        ...
        <retrievalTimestampMaintenance>false</retrievalTimestampMaintenance>
    </caching>
</resource>
----

(It can be done at any level: system configuration, resource, or object type.)

Finally, if the shadow caching is not needed, it is recommended to turn it off.

[#_operation_execution_recording]
== Operation Execution Recording

The majority of objects in midPoint repository (like users and accounts) contain the information about most recent operations that were executed on them.
This feature is crucial when displaying objects that failed during processing within a specific task.
It also provides more visibility into what recent actions were done with a particular object.
(In addition to audit records.)

However, maintaining this information comes at a price: both space and processing time.
The space penalty is bound by the maximum number of records kept per object, which is 10 by default: 5 simple ones and 5 complex ones.
However, the processing time penalty is incurred each time an operation is completed for the object, even if the object is not modified by the operation (in case of complex execution records that reflect the fact that an object was processed by a task).

If necessary, the operation execution recording can be limited to non-success states, by using the following configuration:

[source,xml]
----
<systemConfiguration xmlns="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3">
    ...
    <internals>
        ...
        <operationExecutionRecording>
            <skipWhenSuccess>true</skipWhenSuccess>
        </operationExecutionRecording>
    </internals>
</systemConfiguration>
----

It is the default setting for new installations.

[#_database_tuning]
== Database performance tuning

If you are using native repository, and you observe that some action sometimes takes an unusual amount of time to finish, you may consider to try following Postgres tuning.

=== Postgres autovacuum nap time

Some midPoint actions may cause a big amount of inserts, followed by complex select (e.g. Opening certification campaign stage).
In such situations, it may happen that the select will be executed before Postgres will even detect the need for `VACUUM`/`ANALYZE` operations (caused by big number of inserts).
From our observations, such select could sometimes take a very long time (if at all) to finish.

Even though we try to optimize such cases in the code, it sometimes may be necessary to mitigate this issues by lowering the autovacuum nap time Postgres configuration option.
This property says, how big delay should be between two subsequent checks for need of `VACUUM`/`ANALYZE` operations.
The default is 1 minute.
We suggest you to experiment with lowering of that value to tens of seconds.

NOTE: The autovacuum nap time does not directly affect the execution of the `VACUUM`/`ANALYZE` operations.
It only affects how often the check for need of `VACUUM`/`ANALYZE` will run.
So indirectly, it *MAY* but doesn't *HAVE TO* cause bigger number of `VACUUM`/`ANALYZE` executions.

Autovacuum nap time can be configured in the postgresql.conf file in the AUTOVACUUM section:
[source,conf]
----
autovacuum_naptime = 10s
----

WARNING: The autovacuum nap time is considered per database.
That means, if your Postgres instance hosts more databases, each of those databases will be checked for need of `VACUUM`/`ANALYZE` once per period.
Consequently, if the Postgres instance have N databases, there will be a check executed each `naptime/N` seconds, each time for different database.
