docs/admin-gui/admin-gui-config/default-list-view-panel-configuration.adoc, before:

:page-visibility: hidden
:page-upkeep-status: green

This section describes the default configuration for the list view panels in the GUI.
List view panels are widely used in the GUI to display the list of entities (e.g. a list of the objects or the list of the containers).
Currently, midPoint supports default list view panel configuration for:

* *object collection views* - the list view panels which are presented on the list pages accessible from the left menu (e.g. All users, All roles pages).

* *object details pages* - the list view panels which are a part of the details page (e.g. Assignments -> Role panel on the User details page).

Depending on what part of the GUI you would like to configure, default settings can be configured in different parts of the adminGuiConfiguration.
The location of the configuration defines the area where the configuration will be applied.
E.g. default settings within object details set type will be applied to all list view panels which are a part of the details page.
And default settings defined in the object collection views type will be applied to all collection views in the GUI.

For the moment, only '_paging_' and '_pagingOptions_' configuration is available within default settings.
'_paging_' configuration is intended to be used while querying on the list view panels.
'_pagingOptions_' configuration defines a set of the available page sizes for the list view panel.
The configured set of the available page sizes will be displayed to the user so that they can choose one of the options.

Following table describes the possible configuration options.
[%autowidth]

|===
| Property | Mandatory | Type | Description

| paging
| NO
| PagingType
| Parameters limiting the number of returned entries, offset, etc.
Used in the web service operations such as list or search.
Available parameters are:

_orderBy_ Property by which the results should be sorted

_ascending_ Property by which the results should be sorted

_offset_ The index of the first returned entry, starting with zero.
Therefore, if 0 is specified, the resulting list will start with first entry.
If 1 is specified, the resulting set will start with second entry.
If not specified, value of zero (0) is assumed.

_maxSize_ The maximum number of entries returned.
The operation may return specified number of entries or less.
If not specified, unlimited maximum size is assumed.
If configured for a list view, this value is taken as a default page size on the list view panel.
If the configured value is not present in the set of the available page sizes (see pagingOptions), it will be added to this set as one of the options.

| pagingOptions
| NO
| PagingOptionsType
| Paging options which can be applied to list view in GUI.
Contains a multivalue element _availablePageSize_ (defines a set of available page size values which will be suggested to the user on the table panels).

|===

Default settings can be overridden in the concrete list view configuration.
The settings which are available for the configuration in the _defaultSettings_ element, also present in the collection view type.
This means that _paging_ and _pagingOptions_ can be configured within concrete _objectCollectionView_ in object collection views configuration.
Also, these options can be also configured within _listView_ element while configuring a concrete panel for some object details page.

You can see some examples of the paging settings configuration by the xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/admin-gui-config/admin-gui-config-examples/#default-settings-for-object-details-pages[link].

Commit message:

#10414 Global setting for max page size; documentation and samples update

docs/admin-gui/admin-gui-config/default-list-view-panel-configuration.adoc, after:

:page-visibility: hidden
:page-upkeep-status: green

This section describes the default configuration for the list view panels in the GUI.
List view panels are widely used in the GUI to display the list of entities (e.g. a list of the objects or the list of the containers).
Currently, midPoint supports default list view panel configuration for:

* *object collection views* - the list view panels which are presented on the list pages accessible from the left menu (e.g. All users, All roles pages).

* *object details pages* - the list view panels which are a part of the details page (e.g. Assignments -> Role panel on the User details page).

Depending on what part of the GUI you would like to configure, default settings can be configured in different parts of the adminGuiConfiguration.
The location of the configuration defines the area where the configuration will be applied.
E.g. default settings within object details set type will be applied to all list view panels which are a part of the details page.
And default settings defined in the object collection views type will be applied to all collection views in the GUI.

For the moment, only '_paging_' and '_pagingOptions_' configuration is available within default settings.
'_paging_' configuration is intended to be used while querying on the list view panels.
'_pagingOptions_' configuration defines a set of the available page sizes for the list view panel.
The configured set of the available page sizes will be displayed to the user so that they can choose one of the options.

Following table describes the possible configuration options.
[%autowidth]

|===
| Property | Mandatory | Type | Description

| paging
| NO
| PagingType
| Parameters limiting the number of returned entries, offset, etc.
Used in the web service operations such as list or search.
Available parameters are:

_orderBy_ Property by which the results should be sorted

_ascending_ Property by which the results should be sorted

_offset_ The index of the first returned entry, starting with zero.
Therefore, if 0 is specified, the resulting list will start with first entry.
If 1 is specified, the resulting set will start with second entry.
If not specified, value of zero (0) is assumed.

_maxSize_ The maximum number of entries returned.
The operation may return specified number of entries or less.
If not specified, unlimited maximum size is assumed.
If configured for a list view, this value is taken as a default page size on the list view panel.
If the configured value is not present in the set of the available page sizes (see pagingOptions), it will be added to this set as one of the options.

| pagingOptions
| NO
| PagingOptionsType
| Paging options which can be applied to list view in GUI.
Contains a multivalue element _availablePageSize_ (defines a set of available page size values which will be suggested to the user on the table panels).

|===

Default settings can be overridden or extended in the concrete list view configuration.
Those setting which are single-valued by the definition, can be overridden in the deeper configuration (e.g. in the role).
The multivalue settings can be extended e.g. in the role by adding new values to the set of the available page sizes.

The settings which are available for the configuration in the _defaultSettings_ element, also present in the collection view type.
This means that _paging_ and _pagingOptions_ can be configured within concrete _objectCollectionView_ in object collection views configuration.
Also, these options can be also configured within _listView_ element while configuring a concrete panel for some object details page.

You can see some examples of the paging settings configuration by the xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/admin-gui-config/admin-gui-config-examples/#default-settings-for-object-details-pages[link].
