docs/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/defaults.adoc, before:

= Defaults

== "Default for Kind" Property

This property specifies whether the given resource object type is the default one _for given kind of objects_, i.e. for accounts, entitlements or "generic objects".

Only one type can be the default one for given kind.
Setting this flag to `true` for more than one type is an error.

There are two specific places where this is used.

=== Resource Object Construction

When a resource object construction is assigned to a focus object (for example, to a user), there are the following defaults:

. if _kind_ is not specified, the _account_ is assumed;
. if _intent_ is not specified, the "default for kind" intent is assumed - for the given kind.

=== Search for Resource Objects

There are situations when midPoint searches for resource objects.
The most prominent are searches done as part of import or reconciliation activities.
The use of `projectionDiscriminator` in `associationFromLink` results in a search operation as well.
(See xref:#_sample_constructions[sample constructions] below.)

When searching for resource objects _without providing object class name_, the following applies:

. _kind_ must be specified;
. if _intent_ is not specified, the "default for kind" intent is assumed - for the given kind.

See also xref:/midpoint/reference/tasks/activities/resource-object-set-specification/[].

=== An Example

Let us have the following configuration of object types:

.Listing 18. Sample configuration
[source,xml]
----
<objectType>
    <!-- no kind nor intent specified --> <!--1--><!--2-->
    <displayName>Default account</displayName>
    <defaultForKind>true</defaultForKind>
    <!-- ... -->
</objectType>
<objectType>
    <kind>account</kind>
    <intent>testing</intent>
    <displayName>Testing account</displayName>
    <!-- ... -->
</objectType>
<objectType>
    <kind>entitlement</kind>
    <intent>group</intent>
    <displayName>Standard group</displayName>
    <defaultForKind>true</defaultForKind>
    <!-- ... -->
</objectType>
<objectType>
    <kind>entitlement</kind>
    <intent>other</intent>
    <displayName>Some other entitlement</displayName>
    <!-- ... -->
</objectType>
----
<1> If kind is not specified in the definition, `account` is assumed.
<2> If intent is not specified in the definition, `default` (literally) is assumed.

[#_sample_constructions]
.Listing 19. Sample resource object constructions
[source,xml]
----
<role xmlns="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3">
    <!-- ... -->
    <assignment>
        <construction>
            <resourceRef oid="0e5b7304-ea5c-438e-84d1-2b0ce40517ce"/>
            <kind>entitlement</kind>
            <!-- no intent specified --> <!--1-->
        </construction>
    </assignment>
    <inducement>
        <construction>
            <resourceRef oid="0e5b7304-ea5c-438e-84d1-2b0ce40517ce"/>
            <!-- no kind nor intent specified --> <!--2-->
            <association>
                <ref>ri:groups</ref>
                <outbound>
                    <expression>
                        <associationFromLink>
                            <projectionDiscriminator>
                                <kind>entitlement</kind>
                                <!-- no intent specified --> <!--3-->
                            </projectionDiscriminator>
                        </associationFromLink>
                    </expression>
                </outbound>
            </association>
        </construction>
    </inducement>
</role>
----
<1> `group` intent is assumed, as it is marked as "default for kind" for entitlements (see <<Resource Object Construction>>)
<2> `account` kind is assumed, and within it, `default` intent, as it is marked as "default for kind" for accounts (see <<Resource Object Construction>>)
<3> `group` intent is assumed, as it is marked as "default for kind" for entitlements, and we are doing a search for entitlements here (see <<Search for Resource Objects>>)

[#_default_for_object_class]
== "Default for Object Class" Property

This property specifies whether the given resource object type is the default one for its object class, e.g. for `ri:AccountObjectClass` or `ri:inetOrgPerson`.

Only one type can be the default one for given object class.
Setting this flag to `true` for more than one type is an error.

There are two specific places where this is used.

=== Classifying the Resource Objects

When xref:#_resource_object_classification[classifying resource objects], we often use the type marked as "default for object class" as a "catch-all" type when no other type matches.
However, this functionality can be achieved - perhaps more cleanly - also using `classificationOrder` property of object type delineation.
See the classification algorithm description.

=== Looking for Default Definitions

This applies when searching for resource objects, typically in import or reconciliation activities, and using only the object class name.
For example:

.Listing 20. Importing accounts by object class name
[source,xml]
----
<task>
    <!-- ... -->
    <activity>
        <work>
            <import>
                <resourceObjects>
                    <resourceRef oid="2696334a-c3d1-4aa6-b147-ff16cd387a0f"/>
                    <objectclass>ri:inetOrgPerson</objectclass>
                </resourceObjects>
            </import>
        </work>
    </activity>
</task>
----

There are definitions that should be applied when the query against the resource (looking for all `inetOrgPerson` objects) is issued.
For example, midPoint needs to specify attributes to return or the base context.
When `defaultForObjectClass` is used in a type definition that refers to `inetOrgPerson` class, that type definition is used to provide the necessary information.
(Note that midPoint still attempts to synchronize all members of `inetOrgPerson`.)

However, since 4.6, the preferred way to provide such object-class-level definitions that should be applicable to all objects of given object class
(e.g. `inetOrgPerson`) is to use <<Object Class Definition Adaptation>>, i.e. to provide `schemaHandling/objectClass` refinement for `ri:inetOrgPerson`.
Therefore, it's no longer necessary nor recommended to specify default object type for object class just for this purpose.

Overall, it is better to avoid `defaultForObjectClass` setting, and hence also `default` setting.

== "Default" Property

This is a shorthand for specifying both `defaultForKind` and `defaultForObjectClass`.

These three properties, `defaultForKind`, `defaultForObjectClass` and `default`, may be changed or even removed in the future.

Commit message:

Update schema handling docs
Reviewed schema handling and object type level docs.
Work in progress.

Related to MID-10176.

(cherry picked from commit 3af98ddc5ee652016d2cee793d4bed804d407140)

docs/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/defaults.adoc, after:

= Defaults

== "Default for Kind" Property

This property specifies whether the given resource object type is the default one _for given kind of objects_, i.e. for accounts, entitlements or "generic objects".

Only one type can be the default one for given kind.
Setting this flag to `true` for more than one type is an error.

There are two specific places where this is used.

=== Resource Object Construction

When a resource object construction is assigned to a focus object (for example, to a user), there are the following defaults:

. if _kind_ is not specified, the _account_ is assumed;
. if _intent_ is not specified, the "default for kind" intent is assumed - for the given kind.

=== Search for Resource Objects

There are situations when midPoint searches for resource objects.
The most prominent are searches done as part of import or reconciliation activities.
The use of `projectionDiscriminator` in `associationFromLink` results in a search operation as well.
(See xref:#_sample_constructions[sample constructions] below.)

When searching for resource objects _without providing object class name_, the following applies:

. _kind_ must be specified;
. if _intent_ is not specified, the "default for kind" intent is assumed - for the given kind.

See also xref:/midpoint/reference/tasks/activities/resource-object-set-specification/[].

=== An Example

Let us have the following configuration of object types:

.Listing 18. Sample configuration
[source,xml]
----
<objectType>
    <!-- no kind nor intent specified --> <!--1--><!--2-->
    <displayName>Default account</displayName>
    <defaultForKind>true</defaultForKind>
    <!-- ... -->
</objectType>
<objectType>
    <kind>account</kind>
    <intent>testing</intent>
    <displayName>Testing account</displayName>
    <!-- ... -->
</objectType>
<objectType>
    <kind>entitlement</kind>
    <intent>group</intent>
    <displayName>Standard group</displayName>
    <defaultForKind>true</defaultForKind>
    <!-- ... -->
</objectType>
<objectType>
    <kind>entitlement</kind>
    <intent>other</intent>
    <displayName>Some other entitlement</displayName>
    <!-- ... -->
</objectType>
----
<1> If kind is not specified in the definition, `account` is assumed.
<2> If intent is not specified in the definition, `default` (literally) is assumed.

[#_sample_constructions]
.Listing 19. Sample resource object constructions
[source,xml]
----
<role xmlns="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3">
    <!-- ... -->
    <assignment>
        <construction>
            <resourceRef oid="0e5b7304-ea5c-438e-84d1-2b0ce40517ce"/>
            <kind>entitlement</kind>
            <!-- no intent specified --> <!--1-->
        </construction>
    </assignment>
    <inducement>
        <construction>
            <resourceRef oid="0e5b7304-ea5c-438e-84d1-2b0ce40517ce"/>
            <!-- no kind nor intent specified --> <!--2-->
            <association>
                <ref>ri:groups</ref>
                <outbound>
                    <expression>
                        <associationFromLink>
                            <projectionDiscriminator>
                                <kind>entitlement</kind>
                                <!-- no intent specified --> <!--3-->
                            </projectionDiscriminator>
                        </associationFromLink>
                    </expression>
                </outbound>
            </association>
        </construction>
    </inducement>
</role>
----
<1> `group` intent is assumed, as it is marked as "default for kind" for entitlements (see <<Resource Object Construction>>)
<2> `account` kind is assumed, and within it, `default` intent, as it is marked as "default for kind" for accounts (see <<Resource Object Construction>>)
<3> `group` intent is assumed, as it is marked as "default for kind" for entitlements, and we are doing a search for entitlements here (see <<Search for Resource Objects>>)

[#_default_for_object_class]
== "Default for Object Class" Property

This property specifies whether the given resource object type is the default one for its object class, e.g. for `ri:AccountObjectClass` or `ri:inetOrgPerson`.

Only one type can be the default one for given object class.
Setting this flag to `true` for more than one type is an error.

There are two specific places where this is used.

=== Classifying the Resource Objects

When xref:/midpoint/reference/resources/resource-configuration/schema-handling/classification/[classifying resource objects], we often use the type marked as "default for object class" as a "catch-all" type when no other type matches.
However, this functionality can be achieved - perhaps more cleanly - also using `classificationOrder` property of object type delineation.
See the classification algorithm description.

=== Looking for Default Definitions

This applies when searching for resource objects, typically in import or reconciliation activities, and using only the object class name.
For example:

.Listing 20. Importing accounts by object class name
[source,xml]
----
<task>
    <!-- ... -->
    <activity>
        <work>
            <import>
                <resourceObjects>
                    <resourceRef oid="2696334a-c3d1-4aa6-b147-ff16cd387a0f"/>
                    <objectclass>ri:inetOrgPerson</objectclass>
                </resourceObjects>
            </import>
        </work>
    </activity>
</task>
----

There are definitions that should be applied when the query against the resource (looking for all `inetOrgPerson` objects) is issued.
For example, midPoint needs to specify attributes to return or the base context.
When `defaultForObjectClass` is used in a type definition that refers to `inetOrgPerson` class, that type definition is used to provide the necessary information.
(Note that midPoint still attempts to synchronize all members of `inetOrgPerson`.)

However, since 4.6, the preferred way to provide such object-class-level definitions that should be applicable to all objects of given object class
(e.g. `inetOrgPerson`) is to use <<Object Class Definition Adaptation>>, i.e. to provide `schemaHandling/objectClass` refinement for `ri:inetOrgPerson`.
Therefore, it's no longer necessary nor recommended to specify default object type for object class just for this purpose.

Overall, it is better to avoid `defaultForObjectClass` setting, and hence also `default` setting.

== "Default" Property

This is a shorthand for specifying both `defaultForKind` and `defaultForObjectClass`.

These three properties, `defaultForKind`, `defaultForObjectClass` and `default`, may be changed or even removed in the future.

// If no intent is explicitly specified for a particular object kind, for example when defining the resource object construction, then the default type will be used.
// Only a single intent can be marked as default for each object kind and for each object class in the scope of a resource definition.
