docs/correlation/custom-indexing.adoc, before:

= Custom Indexing
:page-toc: top
:page-since: "4.6"

Sometimes, we need to base the search on specially-indexed data.
For example, we could need to match only first five normalized characters of the surname.
Or, we could want to take only digits into account when searching for the national ID.
MidPoint supports these requirements using _custom indexing_.

IMPORTANT: This feature is available only when using the xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/[native repository implementation].

NOTE: In 4.6, this feature is used in the context of the correlation only.
However, in theory, nothing precludes its use in more general scenarios.
One of them could be, for example, searching for users right in the user list in GUI.

#TODO should we make this feature experimental? There are some open questions regarding the configuration and run-time structures.#

== Overview

For each user, we have a special searchable container for all data that are indexed in this way.
Each time the original data are modified, the content of this container is updated.

This feature can be used to search for:

. data normalized in a custom way, e.g. like "take first five characters of the surname",
. data that are not indexed by default, e.g. the description property,
. so-called xref:/midpoint/reference/correlation/multiple-identities/[multi-identity] data.

== Implementation

The container that stores the indexed data is `identities/identity/items/normalized`.

NOTE: #This is due to an original design from a couple of months ago.
It is to be re-considered before 4.6 release:
First, what should be the exact name and path?
Second, should it be multivalued?#

For each indexing (normalization) defined on a given item, it contains a value or values of the given item (or items in the multi-identity case) after the normalization has been applied.

=== An Example

.Sample indexing for `givenName`, `familyName`, and `costCenter` properties
[%header]
[%autowidth]
|===
| # | Item | Name | Description
| 1
| `givenName`
| `polyStringNorm`
| Default system `PolyString` normalization.

| 2
| `givenName`
| `polyStringNorm.prefix3`
| First three characters of the default system `PolyString` normalization.

| 3
| `familyName`
| `polyStringNorm`
| Default system `PolyString` normalization.

| 4
| `costCenter`
| `original`
| Original value (no normalization).
|===

.Listing 1. Defining sample indexing for three properties
[source,xml]
----
<objectTemplate xmlns="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3"
                oid="74a2112a-0ecc-4c09-818a-1d9e234e8e6f">
    <name>person</name>
    <item>
        <ref>givenName</ref>
        <indexing>
            <normalization>
                <default>true</default>
                <steps>
                    <polyString/> <!--1-->
                </steps>
            </normalization>
            <normalization>
                <steps>
                    <polyString> <!--2-->
                        <order>1</order>
                    </polyString>
                    <prefix>
                        <order>2</order>
                        <length>3</length>
                    </prefix>
                </steps>
            </normalization>
        </indexing>
    </item>
    <item>
        <ref>familyName</ref>
        <indexing/> <!--3-->
    </item>
    <item>
        <ref>costCenter</ref>
        <indexing>
            <normalization>
                <steps>
                    <none/> <!--4-->
                </steps>
            </normalization>
        </indexing>
    </item>
</objectTemplate>
----
<1> PolyString normalization is the default one, and can be omitted. Here it is shown just for completeness.
<2> However, at this place it must be present. Otherwise, we would take the first three characters of the original form.
<3> This tells midPoint to index the `familyName` in the default way (`PolyString` normalization).
<4> If one wants to preserve the original form, it must be explicitly specified like this.

The original and normalized values on a real user object can then look like this:

.Listing 2. Original and normalized values in the real object
[source,xml]
----
<user>
    ...
    <givenName>Alice</givenName>
    <familyName>Black</familyName>
    <costCenter>CCx-1/100</costCenter>
    ...
    <identities>
        <identity>
            <items>
                <normalized xmlns:gen370="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/identity-3">
                    <gen370:familyName.polyStringNorm xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xsi:type="xsd:string">black</gen370:familyName.polyStringNorm>
                    <gen370:givenName.polyStringNorm xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xsi:type="xsd:string">alice</gen370:givenName.polyStringNorm>
                    <gen370:givenName.polyStringNorm.prefix3 xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xsi:type="xsd:string">ali</gen370:givenName.polyStringNorm.prefix3>
                    <gen370:costCenter.original xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xsi:type="xsd:string">CCx-1/100</gen370:costCenter.original>
                </normalized>
            </items>
        </identity>
    </identities>
</user>
----

Note that the whole `identities` container is stored separately from the main focus object.
Moreover, the normalized values are not stored in their serialized (XML, JSON) form, only in the "indexed" form of a JSONB database column.

== Configuration Options

Custom indexing is configured in the _object template_ by attaching `indexing` information to the `item` element.
(It is also turned on by default when multi-identity feature is enabled for the item.)

The following configuration options are available for each item:

.Configuration options for item indexing
[%header]
[%autowidth]
|===
| Option | Description | Example

| `indexedItemName`
| Local item name in the 'indexed items' container.
Usually it can be left unspecified, because by default, the item local name is used.
(The namespace is always `http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/identity-3` (#TODO#))
| `givenName`

| `normalization`
| Set of normalizations that are applied to the given item.
| Default PolyString normalization
|===

Each normalization is configured using these options:

.Configuration options for item normalization
[%header]
[%autowidth]
|===
| Option | Description | Example

| `name`
| Name of the index (normalization).
It is appended to the item name.
Usually it can be left unspecified, because it is derived from the normalization step(s).
| `polyStringNorm`

| `default`
| Is this the default index (normalization) for the given item?
It is necessary to specify it only if there is more than one normalization defined.
| `true`

| `indexedNormalizedItemName`
| Overrides the generated name for the indexed item (original item name + normalization name).
Should not be normally needed.
| `givenName.polyStringNorm`

| `steps`
| How is the indexed value computed?
The default is to use system-defined `PolyString` normalization method.
| Use `PolyString` normalization
|===

There are the following types of normalization steps:

.Types of normalization steps
[%header]
[%autowidth]
|===
| Type | Description | Default normalized item name suffix

| `none`
| Does no normalization, i.e., keeps the original value intact. #TODO or `asIs`?#
| `.original`

| `polyString`
| Applies system-defined or custom `PolyString` normalization.
| `.polyStringNorm`

| `prefix`
| Takes first `N` characters of the value.
| `prefixN`

| `custom`
| Applies a custom normalization expression (e.g., a Groovy script) to the value.
| `custom` footnote:[it is advised to provide a specific name]
|===

#TODO maybe we could make `polyString` and `prefix` regular expression evaluators, so they could be used also in standard mappings?
And we could make all steps a single expression? (after allowing multiple evaluators)?
What about the defaults (`asIs` is currently the default for expression evaluators)#

Each normalization step has the following options:

.Configuration options for a normalization step
[%header]
[%autowidth]
|===
| Option | Applies to | Description

| `order`
| all steps
| Order in which the step is to be applied.
It should be specified (if there's more than single step), because current prism structures (containers) are not guaranteed to preserve the order of their values.
Steps without order value go last.

| `documentation`
| all steps
| Technical documentation for the step.

| `configuration`
| `polyString`
| Configuration of xref:/midpoint/reference/schema/polystring-normalization/[`PolyString` normalizer].
If not specified, the one defined at the system level is used.

| `length`
| `prefix`
| How many characters to keep.

| `expression`
| `custom`
| Expression that transforms the value to its normalized form.
Expects `input` as the original value.
|===

== Querying

The values are queried just like any others.
The only difference is that their definition is dynamic, hence e.g. in Java it must be constructed manually.

.Listing 3. An example normalized (indexed) item query - in Java
[source,java]
----
        ItemName itemName = new ItemName(SchemaConstants.NS_IDENTITY, "familyName.polyStringNorm");
        var def = PrismContext.get().definitionFactory()
                .createPropertyDefinition(itemName, DOMUtil.XSD_STRING, null, null);

        ObjectQuery query = PrismContext.get().queryFor(UserType.class)
                .itemWithDef(def,
                        UserType.F_IDENTITIES,
                        FocusIdentitiesType.F_IDENTITY,
                        FocusIdentityType.F_ITEMS,
                        FocusIdentityItemsType.F_NORMALIZED,
                        itemName)
                .eq("green")
                .build();
----

#TODO Beware, this does not work. 1) because of the dynamic definition, 2) the Axiom has issues with dots in names#

.Listing 4. An example normalized (indexed) item Axiom query
[source,axiom]
----
identities/identity/items/normalized/familyName.polyStringNorm = "green"
----

#TODO Because of the dynamic nature of the indexes, such a query is not interpretable without knowing the archetype/object template
of the objects in question. It is very similar to searching by shadow attribute values; their definition is specified by resource object
type. (Currently, all indexed values are plain strings - but this may not be true in the future.)#

== Maintenance

The index data are maintained automatically by midPoint.

In the current implementation it is the `model` subsystem that takes care of it.
This means that careless "raw" update may break the consistence of the indexed data.

If this happens, or if the definition of the indexing changes, the administrator should execute any regular operation to put things into sync again.
An example of such operation is focus object recomputation.

#TODO Consider finding (or creating) a special partial processing option that would do just this update without the overhead of the full recomputation.#

== Limitations

. This feature is available on the xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/[native repository] only.
. Only `string` and `PolyString` values are currently indexable.
. One must be careful when changing the indexing definition, see <<Maintenance>> section.

Commit message:

Add description of items correlator

docs/correlation/custom-indexing.adoc, after:

= Custom Indexing
:page-toc: top
:page-since: "4.6"

Sometimes, we need to base the search on specially-indexed data.
For example, we could need to match only first five normalized characters of the surname.
Or, we could want to take only digits into account when searching for the national ID.
MidPoint supports these requirements using _custom indexing_.

IMPORTANT: This feature is available only when using the xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/[native repository implementation].

NOTE: In 4.6, this feature is used in the context of the correlation only.
However, in theory, nothing precludes its use in more general scenarios.
One of them could be, for example, searching for users right in the user list in GUI.

#TODO should we make this feature experimental? There are some open questions regarding the configuration and run-time structures.#

== Overview

For each user, we have a special searchable container for all data that are indexed in this way.
Each time the original data are modified, the content of this container is updated.

This feature can be used to search for:

. data normalized in a custom way, e.g. like "take first five characters of the surname",
. data that are not indexed by default, e.g. the description property,
. so-called xref:/midpoint/reference/correlation/multiple-identities/[multi-identity] data.

== Implementation

The container that stores the indexed data is `identities/identity/items/normalized`.

NOTE: #This is due to an original design from a couple of months ago.
It is to be re-considered before 4.6 release:
First, what should be the exact name and path?
Second, should it be multivalued?#

For each indexing (normalization) defined on a given item, it contains a value or values of the given item (or items in the multi-identity case) after the normalization has been applied.

=== An Example

.Sample indexing for `givenName`, `familyName`, and `costCenter` properties
[%header]
[%autowidth]
|===
| # | Item | Name | Description
| 1
| `givenName`
| `polyStringNorm`
| Default system `PolyString` normalization.

| 2
| `givenName`
| `polyStringNorm.prefix3`
| First three characters of the default system `PolyString` normalization.

| 3
| `familyName`
| `polyStringNorm`
| Default system `PolyString` normalization.

| 4
| `costCenter`
| `original`
| Original value (no normalization).
|===

.Listing 1. Defining sample indexing for three properties
[source,xml]
----
<objectTemplate xmlns="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3"
                oid="74a2112a-0ecc-4c09-818a-1d9e234e8e6f">
    <name>person</name>
    <item>
        <ref>givenName</ref>
        <indexing>
            <normalization>
                <default>true</default>
                <steps>
                    <polyString/> <!--1-->
                </steps>
            </normalization>
            <normalization>
                <steps>
                    <polyString> <!--2-->
                        <order>1</order>
                    </polyString>
                    <prefix>
                        <order>2</order>
                        <length>3</length>
                    </prefix>
                </steps>
            </normalization>
        </indexing>
    </item>
    <item>
        <ref>familyName</ref>
        <indexing/> <!--3-->
    </item>
    <item>
        <ref>costCenter</ref>
        <indexing>
            <normalization>
                <steps>
                    <none/> <!--4-->
                </steps>
            </normalization>
        </indexing>
    </item>
</objectTemplate>
----
<1> PolyString normalization is the default one, and can be omitted. Here it is shown just for completeness.
<2> However, at this place it must be present. Otherwise, we would take the first three characters of the original form.
<3> This tells midPoint to index the `familyName` in the default way (`PolyString` normalization).
<4> If one wants to preserve the original form, it must be explicitly specified like this.

The original and normalized values on a real user object can then look like this:

.Listing 2. Original and normalized values in the real object
[source,xml]
----
<user>
    ...
    <givenName>Alice</givenName>
    <familyName>Black</familyName>
    <costCenter>CCx-1/100</costCenter>
    ...
    <identities>
        <identity>
            <items>
                <normalized xmlns:gen370="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/identity-3">
                    <gen370:familyName.polyStringNorm xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xsi:type="xsd:string">black</gen370:familyName.polyStringNorm>
                    <gen370:givenName.polyStringNorm xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xsi:type="xsd:string">alice</gen370:givenName.polyStringNorm>
                    <gen370:givenName.polyStringNorm.prefix3 xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xsi:type="xsd:string">ali</gen370:givenName.polyStringNorm.prefix3>
                    <gen370:costCenter.original xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xsi:type="xsd:string">CCx-1/100</gen370:costCenter.original>
                </normalized>
            </items>
        </identity>
    </identities>
</user>
----

Note that the whole `identities` container is stored separately from the main focus object.
Moreover, the normalized values are not stored in their serialized (XML, JSON) form, only in the "indexed" form of a JSONB database column.

== Configuration Options

Custom indexing is configured in the _object template_ by attaching `indexing` information to the `item` element.
(It is also turned on by default when multi-identity feature is enabled for the item.)

The following configuration options are available for each item:

.Configuration options for item indexing
[%header]
[%autowidth]
|===
| Option | Description | Example

| `indexedItemName`
| Local item name in the 'indexed items' container.
Usually it can be left unspecified, because by default, the item local name is used.
(The namespace is always `http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/identity-3` (#TODO#))
| `givenName`

| `normalization`
| Set of normalizations that are applied to the given item.
| Default PolyString normalization
|===

Each normalization is configured using these options:

.Configuration options for item normalization
[%header]
[%autowidth]
|===
| Option | Description | Example

| `name`
| Name of the index (normalization).
It is appended to the item name.
Usually it can be left unspecified, because it is derived from the normalization step(s).
| `polyStringNorm`

| `default`
| Is this the default index (normalization) for the given item?
It is necessary to specify it only if there is more than one normalization defined.
| `true`

| `indexedNormalizedItemName`
| Overrides the generated name for the indexed item (original item name + normalization name).
Should not be normally needed.
| `givenName.polyStringNorm`

| `steps`
| How is the indexed value computed?
The default is to use system-defined `PolyString` normalization method.
| Use `PolyString` normalization
|===

There are the following types of normalization steps:

.Types of normalization steps
[%header]
[%autowidth]
|===
| Type | Description | Default normalized item name suffix

| `none`
| Does no normalization, i.e., keeps the original value intact. #TODO or `asIs`?#
| `.original`

| `polyString`
| Applies system-defined or custom `PolyString` normalization.
| `.polyStringNorm`

| `prefix`
| Takes first `N` characters of the value.
| `prefixN`

| `custom`
| Applies a custom normalization expression (e.g., a Groovy script) to the value.
| `custom` footnote:[it is advised to provide a specific name]
|===

#TODO maybe we could make `polyString` and `prefix` regular expression evaluators, so they could be used also in standard mappings?
And we could make all steps a single expression? (after allowing multiple evaluators)?
What about the defaults (`asIs` is currently the default for expression evaluators)#

Each normalization step has the following options:

.Configuration options for a normalization step
[%header]
[%autowidth]
|===
| Option | Applies to | Description

| `order`
| all steps
| Order in which the step is to be applied.
It should be specified (if there's more than single step), because current prism structures (containers) are not guaranteed to preserve the order of their values.
Steps without order value go last.

| `documentation`
| all steps
| Technical documentation for the step.

| `configuration`
| `polyString`
| Configuration of xref:/midpoint/reference/schema/polystring-normalization/[`PolyString` normalizer].
If not specified, the one defined at the system level is used.

| `length`
| `prefix`
| How many characters to keep.

| `expression`
| `custom`
| Expression that transforms the value to its normalized form.
Expects `input` as the original value.
|===

== Querying

The values are queried just like any others.
The only difference is that their definition is dynamic, hence e.g. in Java it must be constructed manually.

.Listing 3. An example normalized (indexed) item query - in Java
[source,java]
----
        ItemName itemName = new ItemName(SchemaConstants.NS_IDENTITY, "familyName.polyStringNorm");
        var def = PrismContext.get().definitionFactory()
                .createPropertyDefinition(itemName, DOMUtil.XSD_STRING, null, null);

        ObjectQuery query = PrismContext.get().queryFor(UserType.class)
                .itemWithDef(def,
                        UserType.F_IDENTITIES,
                        FocusIdentitiesType.F_IDENTITY,
                        FocusIdentityType.F_ITEMS,
                        FocusIdentityItemsType.F_NORMALIZED,
                        itemName)
                .eq("green")
                .build();
----

#TODO Beware, this does not work. 1) because of the dynamic definition, 2) the Axiom has issues with dots in names#

.Listing 4. An example normalized (indexed) item Axiom query
[source,axiom]
----
identities/identity/items/normalized/familyName.polyStringNorm = "green"
----

#TODO Because of the dynamic nature of the indexes, such a query is not interpretable without knowing the archetype/object template
of the objects in question. It is very similar to searching by shadow attribute values; their definition is specified by resource object
type. (Currently, all indexed values are plain strings - but this may not be true in the future.)#

== Maintenance

The index data are maintained automatically by midPoint.

In the current implementation it is the `model` subsystem that takes care of it.
This means that careless "raw" update may break the consistence of the indexed data.

If this happens, or if the definition of the indexing changes, the administrator should execute any regular operation to put things into sync again.
An example of such operation is focus object recomputation.

#TODO Consider finding (or creating) a special partial processing option that would do just this update without the overhead of the full recomputation.#

== Limitations

. This feature is available on the xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-postgresql/[native repository] only.
. Only `string` and `PolyString` values are currently indexable.
. One must be careful when editing the data in "raw" mode and when changing the indexing definition, see <<Maintenance>> section.

== See Also

- xref:/midpoint/reference/correlation/items-correlator/[Item-based correlator]
