docs/correlation/rule-composition.adoc, before:

= Rule Composition
:page-toc: top
:page-since: "4.6"

== Correlators (Correlation Rules)

The basic element of the configuration is the _correlation rule_ (or _correlator_) configuration.

NOTE: The _correlation rule_ is more user-oriented term, while _correlator_ is more implementation-oriented one.
See also the xref:index.adoc[overview document].
Risking a bit of confusion, let us use the term _correlator_ in this document, at least for now.

Correlators are hierarchical, with a specified default algorithm for combining their results.

In midPoint 4.6 we support only the flat hierarchy: the composite correlator defined at the top, with component correlators right beneath it.
Please see <<Limitations>> section at the end of this document.

== Composition Algorithm Outline

Individual correlators are evaluated in a defined order (see <<Tiers and Rule Ordering>>).
Each correlator produces a set of _candidates_ having zero, one, or more objects.
Each candidate has a (local) _confidence_ value from the interval of (0, 1].
Each correlator has its own _weight_.
After the evaluation, a union of all candidate sets is created, and the overall confidence for each candidate is computed:

image::confidence-formula.png[Confidence formula,width=600,pdfwidth=50%,scaledwidth=50%]

Where

- total confidence~cand~ is the total confidence for candidate _cand_ (being computed),
- confidence~cand,cor~ is the confidence of candidate _cand_ provided by child correlator _cor_,
- weight~cor~ is the weight of child correlator _cor_ in the composition (a parameter of the composition; default is 1),
- _scale_ is the scale of the given composite correlator (a parameter of the composition; default is 1).

== A Naive Example

Let us have rules like these:

.Sample set of correlation rules
[%header]
[%autowidth]
|===
| Rule name | Rule content | Weight
| name-date-id
| Family name, date of birth, and national ID exactly match.
| 1.0
| names-date
| Given name, family name, and date of birth exactly match.
| 0.4
| id
| The national ID exactly matches.
| 0.4
|===

.Graphic representation of the sample set of correlation rules
image::naive-example.png[A naive example,width=1000,pdfwidth=50%,scaledwidth=50%]

.Listing 1. Configuration related to the sample set of correlation rules
[source,xml]
----
<correlators>
    <items>
        <name>name-date-id</name>
        <item>
            <ref>familyName</ref>
        </item>
        <item>
            <ref>extension/dateOfBirth</ref>
        </item>
        <item>
            <ref>extension/nationalId</ref>
        </item>
        <!-- Weight of 1.0 is the default -->
    </items>
    <items>
        <name>names-date</name>
        <item>
            <ref>givenName</ref>
        </item>
        <item>
            <ref>familyName</ref>
        </item>
        <item>
            <ref>extension/dateOfBirth</ref>
        </item>
        <composition>
            <weight>0.4</weight>
        </composition>
    </items>
    <items>
        <name>id</name>
        <item>
            <ref>extension/nationalId</ref>
        </item>
        <composition>
            <weight>0.4</weight>
        </composition>
    </items>
</correlators>
----

Let us assume we are correlating `Ian Smith, 2004-02-06, 040206/1328` and the candidate is `John Smith, 2004-02-06, 040206/1328`.

- The `name-date-id` correlator matches with a local confidence of `1.0`. Having weight of `1.0`, the overall confidence increment is `1.0`.
- The `names-date` correlator does not match.
- The `id` correlator matches with a local confidence of `1.0`. Having weight of `0.4`, the overall confidence increment is `0.4`.

The total confidence is `1.4`, cropped down to `1.0`.

== "Ignore if Matched by" Flag

We see that the match of the rule `name-date-id` implies the match of the rule `id`.
Hence, each candidate matching `name-date-id` gets a confidence increment `1.4`.
This is, most probably, not the behavior that we expect.
(While not necessarily incorrect, it is quite counter-intuitive.)

Therefore, we have introduced a mechanism to mark rule `id` as being ignored for those candidates that are matched by rule `name-date-id` before.
It is done by setting `ignoreIfMatchedBy` like this:

.Listing 2. Ignoring `id` rule for candidates matching `name-date-id`
[source,xml]
----
<correlators>
    ...
    <items>
        <name>id</name>
        <item>
            <ref>extension/nationalId</ref>
        </item>
        <composition>
            <weight>0.4</weight>
            <ignoreIfMatchedBy>name-date-id</ignoreIfMatchedBy>
        </composition>
    </items>
</correlators>
----

Now, when correlating `Ian Smith, 2004-02-06, 040206/1328` with the candidate being `John Smith, 2004-02-06, 040206/1328`,

- The `name-date-id` correlator matches with a local confidence of `1.0`. Having weight of `1.0`, the overall confidence increment is `1.0`.
- The `names-date` correlator does not match.
- The `id` correlator matches with a local confidence of `1.0`. However, it is ignored, because of the match of `name-date-id`.

The total confidence is thus `1.0`.

== Tiers and Rule Ordering

image::tiers.png[Tiers,width=1000,pdfwidth=50%,scaledwidth=50%]

#TODO#

== Using the Resulting Confidence Values

In midPoint 4.6, the resulting aggregated confidence values for individual candidates are compared with two _threshold values_:

. _Automatic match threshold_ (`AM`):
if a confidence value is equal or greater than this one, the candidate is considered to automatically match the identity data.
(If, for some reason, multiple candidates do this, then the situation is reported as a potential problem, and human decision is requested.)

. _No-match threshold_ (`NM`):
if a confidence value is below this one, the candidate is not considered to be matching at all - not even for human decision.

Said in other words:

. If there is a single candidate with confidence value &ge; `AM` then it is automatically matched.
. Otherwise, all candidates with confidence value &ge; `NM` are taken for human resolution.
(If there are multiple candidates with confidence value &ge; `AM` among them, then the situation is reported as suspicious.)
. If there are none, "no match" situation is assumed.

Configuration:

#TODO#

Default values:

.Default values for the threshold
[%header]
[%autowidth]
|===
| Threshold | Default value
| Automatic match (`AM`) | 1.0
| No-match (`NM`) | 0.0
|===

== Limitations

Although it is possible to configure arbitrary combination of the correlators, and such a combination will most probably work, for practical reasons there are the following limitations of what is "officially" supported. Everything beyond this is considered to be xref:/midpoint/versioning/experimental/[experimental] functionality:

. ID Match correlator cannot be combined with other correlators.
. Filter-based correlators cannot be combined with the other ones.
. Expression-based correlators are experimental altogether.
. Composite correlator can be provided at the top level only.

Said in other words, only the `items` correlators can be combined.
The use of other ones in the composition is considered experimental.

Commit message:

Update smart correlation rule composition page
(experimenting)

docs/correlation/rule-composition.adoc, after:

= Rule Composition
:page-toc: top
:page-since: "4.6"

== Correlators (Correlation Rules)

The basic element of the correlation configuration is the definition of _correlation rules_ (or _correlators_).

NOTE: The _correlation rule_ is more user-oriented term, while _correlator_ is more implementation-oriented one.
See also the xref:index.adoc[overview document].
Risking a bit of confusion, let us use the term _correlator_ in this document.

Correlators are hierarchical, with a specified default algorithm for combining their results.

In midPoint 4.6 we support only the flat hierarchy: a composite correlator defined on top, with component correlators right beneath it.
Please see <<Limitations>> section at the end of this document.

== Composition Algorithm Outline

Individual correlators are evaluated in a defined order (see <<Tiers and Rule Ordering>>).

Each correlator produces a set of _candidates_ having zero, one, or more objects.
Each candidate has a (local) _confidence_ value from the interval of (0, 1].
Each correlator has its own _weight_ that is used as a multiplication factor for the local confidence values produced by the correlator.
(For convenience, a global _scale_ can be defined. It can be used to re-scale the confidence values to the interval of (0, 1].)

After the evaluation, a union of all candidate sets is created, and the overall confidence for each candidate is computed:

image::confidence-formula.png[Confidence formula,width=600,pdfwidth=50%,scaledwidth=50%]

Where

- _total confidence~cand~_ is the total confidence for candidate _cand_ (being computed),
- _confidence~cand,cor~_ is the confidence of candidate _cand_ provided by child correlator _cor_,
- _weight~cor~_ is the weight of child correlator _cor_ in the composition (a parameter of the composition; default is 1),
- _scale_ is the scale of the given composite correlator (a parameter of the composition; default is 1).

== A Naive Example

=== Rules

Let us have rules like these:

.Sample set of correlation rules
[%header]
[%autowidth]
|===
| Rule name | Rule content | Weight
| name-date-id
| Family name, date of birth, and national ID exactly match.
| 1.0
| names-date
| Given name, family name, and date of birth exactly match.
| 0.4
| id
| The national ID exactly matches.
| 0.4
|===

.Graphic representation of the sample set of correlation rules
image::naive-example.png[A naive example,width=1000,pdfwidth=50%,scaledwidth=50%]

=== Configuration

.Listing 1. Configuration defining the sample set of correlation rules
[source,xml]
----
<correlators>
    <items>
        <name>name-date-id</name>
        <item>
            <ref>familyName</ref>
        </item>
        <item>
            <ref>extension/dateOfBirth</ref>
        </item>
        <item>
            <ref>extension/nationalId</ref>
        </item>
        <!-- Weight of 1.0 is the default -->
    </items>
    <items>
        <name>names-date</name>
        <item>
            <ref>givenName</ref>
        </item>
        <item>
            <ref>familyName</ref>
        </item>
        <item>
            <ref>extension/dateOfBirth</ref>
        </item>
        <composition>
            <weight>0.4</weight>
        </composition>
    </items>
    <items>
        <name>id</name>
        <item>
            <ref>extension/nationalId</ref>
        </item>
        <composition>
            <weight>0.4</weight>
        </composition>
    </items>
</correlators>
----

=== Example Computation

Let us assume we are correlating [blue]`Ian Smith, 2004-02-06, 040206/1328` and the candidate is [blue]`John Smith, 2004-02-06, 040206/1328`.

- The `name-date-id` correlator matches with a local confidence of [blue]*1.0*. Having weight of [red]*1.0*, the overall confidence increment is [purple]*1.0*.
- The `names-date` correlator does not match. Therefore, there is no confidence increment from it.
- The `id` correlator matches with a local confidence of [blue]*1.0*. Having weight of [red]*0.4*, the overall confidence increment is [purple]*0.4*.

The total confidence is [purple]*1.4*, cropped down to [purple]*1.0*.

== "Ignore if Matched by" Flag

We see that the match of the rule `name-date-id` implies the match of the rule `id`.
Hence, each candidate matching `name-date-id` gets a confidence increment `1.4`.
This is, most probably, not the behavior that we expect.
(While not necessarily incorrect, it is quite counter-intuitive.)

Therefore, we have introduced a mechanism to mark rule `id` as being ignored for those candidates that are matched by rule `name-date-id` before.
It is done by setting `ignoreIfMatchedBy` like this:

.Listing 2. Ignoring `id` rule for candidates matching `name-date-id`
[source,xml]
----
<correlators>
    ...
    <items>
        <name>id</name>
        <item>
            <ref>extension/nationalId</ref>
        </item>
        <composition>
            <weight>0.4</weight>
            <ignoreIfMatchedBy>name-date-id</ignoreIfMatchedBy>
        </composition>
    </items>
</correlators>
----

Now, when correlating `Ian Smith, 2004-02-06, 040206/1328` with the candidate being `John Smith, 2004-02-06, 040206/1328`,

- The `name-date-id` correlator matches with a local confidence of `1.0`. Having weight of `1.0`, the overall confidence increment is `1.0`.
- The `names-date` correlator does not match.
- The `id` correlator matches with a local confidence of `1.0`. However, it is ignored, because of the match of `name-date-id`.

The total confidence is thus `1.0`.

== Tiers and Rule Ordering

image::tiers.png[Tiers,width=1000,pdfwidth=50%,scaledwidth=50%]

#TODO#

== Using the Resulting Confidence Values

In midPoint 4.6, the resulting aggregated confidence values for individual candidates are compared with two _threshold values_:

. _Automatic match threshold_ (`AM`):
if a confidence value is equal or greater than this one, the candidate is considered to automatically match the identity data.
(If, for some reason, multiple candidates do this, then the situation is reported as a potential problem, and human decision is requested.)

. _No-match threshold_ (`NM`):
if a confidence value is below this one, the candidate is not considered to be matching at all - not even for human decision.

Said in other words:

. If there is a single candidate with confidence value &ge; `AM` then it is automatically matched.
. Otherwise, all candidates with confidence value &ge; `NM` are taken for human resolution.
(If there are multiple candidates with confidence value &ge; `AM` among them, then the situation is reported as suspicious.)
. If there are none, "no match" situation is assumed.

Configuration:

#TODO#

Default values:

.Default values for the threshold
[%header]
[%autowidth]
|===
| Threshold | Default value
| Automatic match (`AM`) | 1.0
| No-match (`NM`) | 0.0
|===

== Limitations

Although it is possible to configure arbitrary combination of the correlators, and such a combination will most probably work, for practical reasons there are the following limitations of what is "officially" supported. Everything beyond this is considered to be xref:/midpoint/versioning/experimental/[experimental] functionality:

. ID Match correlator cannot be combined with other correlators.
. Filter-based correlators cannot be combined with the other ones.
. Expression-based correlators are experimental altogether.
. Composite correlator can be provided at the top level only.

Said in other words, only the `items` correlators can be combined.
The use of other ones in the composition is considered experimental.
