docs/deployment/ninja/index.adoc, before:

= Ninja
:page-wiki-name: Ninja
:page-wiki-id: 24676171
:page-wiki-metadata-create-user: lazyman
:page-wiki-metadata-create-date: 2017-12-13T13:04:51.807+01:00
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-user: vix
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-date: 2020-02-28T12:26:18.029+01:00
:page-upkeep-status: red
:page-upkeep-note: Need to update, also for midScale and DB migration
:page-alias: { "parent" : "/midpoint/tools/" }
:page-toc: top

Ninja is a command line tool bundled with midPoint.
Implemented features are based on "repo-ninja", but code was rewritten from the ground up.
This tool comes in handy when one needs to export or import objects from/to midPoint.
Operations can be done on top of repository (DB) layer or through REST API.
Access through DB layer can be very powerful, especially in cases when UI fails.
For example when midPoint fails to start because of configuration issue or objects data corruption.
Another great example is "administrator" user lockout.

Users of this tool need to be aware that using repository layer, access is not validated using
authorisations, model component is not used during processing and changes are not audited.
It allows you to obtain or modify data in an otherwise unusable midPoint.
Ninja also plan to support some other operations like listing keys from keystore, enforcing objects
reencryption with new key, DB schema validation, password reset or user unlock.

Ninja can be started using standard `java -jar` or via bundled shell/bat script.
Bundled shell and bat scripts are located in the midPoint installation directory, e.g. `<midpoint>/bin/ninja.sh`.
Bundled scripts will automatically fill in path to for xref:/midpoint/reference/deployment/midpoint-home-directory/[midPoint home]
option `-m` using `MIDPOINT_HOME` environment variable, defaulting to the `<midpoint>/var`.

== Connecting to midPoint

Connection options:

* using `midpoint.home`
* using REST service (not yet implemented)

=== midpoint.home connection

This type of connection initialises repository layer of midPoint and operates on top of the database as a new midPoint node.
Mostly only one option is needed and that's specification of `midpoint.home` directory using `-m` option.
This is not sufficient if `config.xml` uses datasource definition.
Ninja then doesn't know how to connect to DB.
For this case one have to use options to specify URL (`-U`), username (`-u`) and password (`-p` or `-P`).
These options can also be used to override JDBC URL, username and password specified in `config.xml`.

With bash, you can provide `MIDPOINT_HOME` for the `ninja.sh` command with this shortcut:
[source,bash]

----
MIDPOINT_HOME=/var/other-mp-home <midpoint>/bin/ninja.sh [general options] [command] [command options]
----

If unbundled JDBC driver is used, it will not be picked up automatically from the midPoint home directory
and you must point Ninja to it explicitly.
Example when using `java -jar`:

[source,bash]
----
java -Dloader.path=<jdbc_driver_jar_path> -jar ninja.jar [general options] [command] [command options]
----

If the bundled scripts are used, you can specify the path to the driver with `-j` option, for example:

[source,bash]
----
<midpoint>/bin/ninja.sh -j <JDBC_DRIVER_JAR> [general options] [command] [command options]
----

=== REST connection

[NOTE]
====
Not yet implemented.
====

// TODO: mention python CLI

== Supported operations

Ninja currently supports these operations:

* import
* export
* verify (midPoint 3.9 or later)
* keys
* count
* delete
* importAudit (midPoint 4.4.1 or later)
* exportAudit (midPoint 4.4.1 or later)

=== Import

Import command allow users to import objects from `SYSOUT` or file (either plain XML or compressed ZIP, which may contain multiple files).
One can define `oid`, multiple types or filter to filter imported objects.
Example of import from XML file using 4 threads with raw and overwrite option using explicit `midpoint.home` folder path:

.Example
[source,bash]
----
java -jar ninja.jar -m ~/Desktop/midpoint/var import -O -i midpoint/samples/objects/user-ceresnickova.xml -l 4 -r
----

=== Export

Export command allows users to export objects to SYSOUT or file (either plain XML or compressed ZIP).
One can define oid, multiple types or filter to filter exported objects.
Export objects to compressed zip file using 4 threads:

.Example
[source,bash]
----
java -jar ninja.jar -m ~/Desktop/midpoint/var export -O export.zip -z -l 4
----

Use -ow switch if you wish to overwrite an existing output file.

=== Verify

[TIP]
.MidPoint 3.9 and later
====
This feature is available only in midPoint 3.9 and later.

====

Command that verifies objects in midPoint repository.
It displays warnings about objects to SYSOUT or file.
Similarly to export, one can define oid, multiple types or filter to filter verified objects.
Simple usage to verify all objects in the repository for all warnings:

.Example: verify all objects in repository for all warnings
[source,bash]
----
ninja.sh verify
----

There is a -w switch that can be used to select specific warnings to display.
Currently, it only supports values deprecated and plannedRemoval.
Following command will show warnings about planned removal of items used by all objects in the repository:

.Example: verify all objects in repository for planned removal of items
[source,bash]
----
ninja.sh verify -w plannedRemoval
----

=== Keys

List keys in with aliases from keystore located in `midpoint.home`.

.Example
[source,bash]
----
java -jar ninja.jar -m /opt/midpoint-home keys -K
----

=== Audit export/import

[NOTE]
Audit export/import uses the same format as objects, even utilizing `<objects>` element,
but audit records are *containers, not objects*.
These files are only useful for Ninja import/export, do not try to use them in Studio or otherwise.

.Example: audit export to a zipped file, overwriting any existing file, using an Axiom filter
[source,bash]
----
ninja.sh exportAudit -O audit-export.xml.zip -z -ow -f '%timestamp < "2021-12-01"'
----

Now you can move the exported file to a new environment and run the import:

.Example: audit import
[source,bash]
----
ninja.sh importAudit -i audit-export.xml.zip -z
----

Check also the xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-audit/#audit-migration-from-other-database[migration guide for the Native audit].

== Other scenarios

=== Administrator unlock

Ninja does not provide unlock or password reset operations explicitly.
Normally administrator can do this via GUI.
It may happen that administrator locks out itself from the system, in which case we recommend to reinitialize the object:

.Administrator object refresh from the initial object
[source,bash]
----
ninja.sh import --input <midpoint>/doc/config/initial-objects/050-user-administrator.xml --overwrite
----

Now, this is rather a drastic measure - let's modify the existing user instead.
First we need to export it.

[NOTE]
If you want to use Ninja for midPoint running with H2 database (which is sensible only for testing), the application must be stopped first.
Other databases have dedicated servers and Ninja can be used while midPoint is running.

.Exporting administrator user by OID
[source,bash]
----
ninja.sh export --oid 00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000002 --output admin.xml
----

Alternatively, you can use type option and filter to specify name
(don't forget the `--overwrite` option, if the file already exists):

.Exporting user by name
[source,bash]
----
ninja.sh export --type user --filter '% name = "administrator"' --output admin.xml
----

Now is the time to carefully edit the object XML.
If a single object is in the XML (which is our case), you can remove the `<objects>` wrapper element.
This may actually help with code completion if xref:/midpoint/tools/studio/[midPoint Studio] is used.

Typical fixes to shape up the uncooperative user object are:

* Remove `administrativeStatus` and `effectiveStatus` elements from the top-level `activation`
element (be sure not to modify `activation` under `assignments` inadvertently).
This should fix any problems with disabled user.
* If you forgot the password, change the whole content of the `credentials/password/value` element
to this snippet (must be inside the `value` element):
+
[source,xml]
----
<t:clearValue>asdf1234</t:clearValue>
----

After the fixes, it's time to push the object back into the repository.
Import process can handle both plain object or objects inside `<object>` container.
Use the following command:

.Importing the fixed user object
[source,bash]
----
ninja.sh import --input admin.xml --overwrite
----

Now you should enjoy easy administrator login.
Of course, this works for any user object, but using the GUI with working administrator is the way to go.

== Full help

.Full help
[source]
----
$ java -jar target/ninja.jar -h
Usage: java [-Dloader.path=<jdbc_driver_jar_path>] -jar ninja.jar [options] [command] [command options]
  Options:
    -c, --charset
      Charset used for input/output
      Default: utf-8
    -h, --help
      Print this help
    -m, --midpoint-home
      Path to MidPoint home folder. If relative path is specified, it will be translated to absolute path.
    --offline
      Do not use repository (local nor via webservice)
      Default: false
    -p, --password
      Password for rest/jdbc connection
    -P, --password-ask
      Please write rest/jdbc connection password
    -s, --silent
      No output at all
      Default: false
    -U, --url
      URL to MidPoint model webservice endpoint or JDBC URL to database. If '-m' option is used URL will be
      used to connect to JDBC database. If '-m' is not specified then this parameter is used as MidPoint REST
      URL endpoint.
    -u, --username
      Username for rest/jdbc connection
    -v, --verbose
      Verbose output
      Default: false
    -V, --version
      Version and build description
      Default: false
  Commands:
    import      Imports objects into MidPoint
      Usage: import [options]
        Options:
          -e, --allowUnencryptedValues
            Allow unencrypted values
            Default: false
          -f, --filter
            Value of object filter used to search objects. If you start the filter with the letter @, the
            rest should be a filename. Start the filter with % to use Axiom query language.
          -i, --input
            Input file for import
          -l, --multi-thread
            How many threads to use for operation.
            Default: 1
          -o, --oid
            Object OID
          -O, --overwrite
            Overwrite input file
            Default: false
          -r, --raw
            Use raw option
            Default: false
          -t, --type
            Object type, case insensitive value, e.g. "user". Do not use "Type" suffix.
            Default: []
          -z, --zip
            Use zip/unzip compression
            Default: false

    export      Exports objects from midPoint
      Usage: export [options]
        Options:
          -f, --filter
            Value of object filter used to search objects. If you start the filter with the letter @, the
            rest should be a filename. Start the filter with % to use Axiom query language.
          -l, --multi-thread
            How many threads to use for operation.
            Default: 1
          -ni, --no-container-ids
            Skips container ids
            Default: false
          -o, --oid
            Object OID
          -O, --output
            Output file for export
          -ow, --overwrite
            Overwrite output file
            Default: false
          -r, --raw
            Use raw option
            Default: false
          -t, --type
            Object type, case insensitive value, e.g. "user". Do not use "Type" suffix.
            Default: []
          -z, --zip
            Use zip/unzip compression
            Default: false

    delete      delete
      Usage: delete [options]
        Options:
          -a, --ask
            Ask before object deletion
            Default: false
          -f, --filter
            Value of object filter used to search objects. If you start the filter with the letter @, the
            rest should be a filename. Start the filter with % to use Axiom query language.
          -F, --force
            Force option
            Default: false
          -o, --oid
            Object OID
          -r, --raw
            Raw option
            Default: false
          -t, --type
            Object type, case insensitive value, e.g. "user". Do not use "Type" suffix.
            Possible Values: [CONNECTOR, CONNECTOR_HOST, GENERIC_OBJECT, RESOURCE, USER, OBJECT_TEMPLATE, SYSTEM_CONFIGURATION, TASK, SHADOW, ROLE, PASSWORD_POLICY, NODE, FORM, ORG, ABSTRACT_ROLE, FOCUS_TYPE, ASSIGNMENT_HOLDER_TYPE, REPORT, REPORT_DATA, SECURITY_POLICY, LOOKUP_TABLE, ACCESS_CERTIFICATION_DEFINITION, ACCESS_CERTIFICATION_CAMPAIGN, SEQUENCE, SERVICE, CASE, FUNCTION_LIBRARY, OBJECT_COLLECTION, ARCHETYPE, DASHBOARD, OBJECT]

    count      Count objects in midPoint repository
      Usage: count [options]
        Options:
          -f, --filter
            Value of object filter used to search objects. If you start the filter with the letter @, the
            rest should be a filename. Start the filter with % to use Axiom query language.
          -t, --type
            Object type, case insensitive value, e.g. "user". Do not use "Type" suffix.
            Default: []

    verify      Verify objects in midPoint repository
      Usage: verify [options]
        Options:
          -f, --filter
            Value of object filter used to search objects. If you start the filter with the letter @, the
            rest should be a filename. Start the filter with % to use Axiom query language.
          -l, --multi-thread
            How many threads to use for operation.
            Default: 1
          -ni, --no-container-ids
            Skips container ids
            Default: false
          -o, --oid
            Object OID
          -O, --output
            Output file for export
          -ow, --overwrite
            Overwrite output file
            Default: false
          -r, --raw
            Use raw option
            Default: false
          -t, --type
            Object type, case insensitive value, e.g. "user". Do not use "Type" suffix.
            Default: []
          -w, --warn
            List of displayed warning categories, e.g. deprecated, plannedRemoval, uuid
          -z, --zip
            Use zip/unzip compression
            Default: false

    keys      List keys from keystore
      Usage: keys [options]
        Options:
          -k, --key-password
            Key password
          -K
            Please write key password

    info      Shows information about repository for the provided midPoint home
      Usage: info

    importAudit      Imports audit records into MidPoint
      Usage: importAudit [options]
        Options:
          -f, --filter
            Value of object filter used to search objects. If you start the filter with the letter @, the
            rest should be a filename. Start the filter with % to use Axiom query language.
          -i, --input
            Input file for import
          -l, --multi-thread
            How many threads to use for operation.
            Default: 1
          -O, --overwrite
            Overwrite input file
            Default: false
          -z, --zip
            Use zip/unzip compression
            Default: false

    exportAudit      Exports audit records from MidPoint
      Usage: exportAudit [options]
        Options:
          -f, --filter
            Value of object filter used to search objects. If you start the filter with the letter @, the
            rest should be a filename. Start the filter with % to use Axiom query language.
          -l, --multi-thread
            How many threads to use for operation.
            Default: 1
          -O, --output
            Output file for export
          -ow, --overwrite
            Overwrite output file
            Default: false
          -z, --zip
            Use zip/unzip compression
            Default: false

    trace      Edit trace file
      Usage: trace [options]
        Options:
          --input
            Input trace file
          --keep
            Operation results to be kept (with their children). Asterisk is allowed. All above them will be
            removed.
          --kill
            Operation results to be removed (with their children). Asterisk is allowed.
          --output
            Output trace file (default is "output.zip")
          --print-stat
            Print statistics
            Default: false
          --print-stat-extra
            Print extra statistics i.e. the node size. Takes longer time.
            Default: false
----

Commit message:

ninja: added obvious note about changing the password

docs/deployment/ninja/index.adoc, after:

= Ninja
:page-wiki-name: Ninja
:page-wiki-id: 24676171
:page-wiki-metadata-create-user: lazyman
:page-wiki-metadata-create-date: 2017-12-13T13:04:51.807+01:00
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-user: vix
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-date: 2020-02-28T12:26:18.029+01:00
:page-upkeep-status: red
:page-upkeep-note: Need to update, also for midScale and DB migration
:page-alias: { "parent" : "/midpoint/tools/" }
:page-toc: top

Ninja is a command line tool bundled with midPoint.
Implemented features are based on "repo-ninja", but code was rewritten from the ground up.
This tool comes in handy when one needs to export or import objects from/to midPoint.
Operations can be done on top of repository (DB) layer or through REST API.
Access through DB layer can be very powerful, especially in cases when UI fails.
For example when midPoint fails to start because of configuration issue or objects data corruption.
Another great example is "administrator" user lockout.

Users of this tool need to be aware that using repository layer, access is not validated using
authorisations, model component is not used during processing and changes are not audited.
It allows you to obtain or modify data in an otherwise unusable midPoint.
Ninja also plan to support some other operations like listing keys from keystore, enforcing objects
reencryption with new key, DB schema validation, password reset or user unlock.

Ninja can be started using standard `java -jar` or via bundled shell/bat script.
Bundled shell and bat scripts are located in the midPoint installation directory, e.g. `<midpoint>/bin/ninja.sh`.
Bundled scripts will automatically fill in path to for xref:/midpoint/reference/deployment/midpoint-home-directory/[midPoint home]
option `-m` using `MIDPOINT_HOME` environment variable, defaulting to the `<midpoint>/var`.

== Connecting to midPoint

Connection options:

* using `midpoint.home`
* using REST service (not yet implemented)

=== midpoint.home connection

This type of connection initialises repository layer of midPoint and operates on top of the database as a new midPoint node.
Mostly only one option is needed and that's specification of `midpoint.home` directory using `-m` option.
This is not sufficient if `config.xml` uses datasource definition.
Ninja then doesn't know how to connect to DB.
For this case one have to use options to specify URL (`-U`), username (`-u`) and password (`-p` or `-P`).
These options can also be used to override JDBC URL, username and password specified in `config.xml`.

With bash, you can provide `MIDPOINT_HOME` for the `ninja.sh` command with this shortcut:
[source,bash]

----
MIDPOINT_HOME=/var/other-mp-home <midpoint>/bin/ninja.sh [general options] [command] [command options]
----

If unbundled JDBC driver is used, it will not be picked up automatically from the midPoint home directory
and you must point Ninja to it explicitly.
Example when using `java -jar`:

[source,bash]
----
java -Dloader.path=<jdbc_driver_jar_path> -jar ninja.jar [general options] [command] [command options]
----

If the bundled scripts are used, you can specify the path to the driver with `-j` option, for example:

[source,bash]
----
<midpoint>/bin/ninja.sh -j <JDBC_DRIVER_JAR> [general options] [command] [command options]
----

=== REST connection

[NOTE]
====
Not yet implemented.
====

// TODO: mention python CLI

== Supported operations

Ninja currently supports these operations:

* import
* export
* verify (midPoint 3.9 or later)
* keys
* count
* delete
* importAudit (midPoint 4.4.1 or later)
* exportAudit (midPoint 4.4.1 or later)

=== Import

Import command allow users to import objects from `SYSOUT` or file (either plain XML or compressed ZIP, which may contain multiple files).
One can define `oid`, multiple types or filter to filter imported objects.
Example of import from XML file using 4 threads with raw and overwrite option using explicit `midpoint.home` folder path:

.Example
[source,bash]
----
java -jar ninja.jar -m ~/Desktop/midpoint/var import -O -i midpoint/samples/objects/user-ceresnickova.xml -l 4 -r
----

=== Export

Export command allows users to export objects to SYSOUT or file (either plain XML or compressed ZIP).
One can define oid, multiple types or filter to filter exported objects.
Export objects to compressed zip file using 4 threads:

.Example
[source,bash]
----
java -jar ninja.jar -m ~/Desktop/midpoint/var export -O export.zip -z -l 4
----

Use -ow switch if you wish to overwrite an existing output file.

=== Verify

[TIP]
.MidPoint 3.9 and later
====
This feature is available only in midPoint 3.9 and later.

====

Command that verifies objects in midPoint repository.
It displays warnings about objects to SYSOUT or file.
Similarly to export, one can define oid, multiple types or filter to filter verified objects.
Simple usage to verify all objects in the repository for all warnings:

.Example: verify all objects in repository for all warnings
[source,bash]
----
ninja.sh verify
----

There is a -w switch that can be used to select specific warnings to display.
Currently, it only supports values deprecated and plannedRemoval.
Following command will show warnings about planned removal of items used by all objects in the repository:

.Example: verify all objects in repository for planned removal of items
[source,bash]
----
ninja.sh verify -w plannedRemoval
----

=== Keys

List keys in with aliases from keystore located in `midpoint.home`.

.Example
[source,bash]
----
java -jar ninja.jar -m /opt/midpoint-home keys -K
----

=== Audit export/import

[NOTE]
Audit export/import uses the same format as objects, even utilizing `<objects>` element,
but audit records are *containers, not objects*.
These files are only useful for Ninja import/export, do not try to use them in Studio or otherwise.

.Example: audit export to a zipped file, overwriting any existing file, using an Axiom filter
[source,bash]
----
ninja.sh exportAudit -O audit-export.xml.zip -z -ow -f '%timestamp < "2021-12-01"'
----

Now you can move the exported file to a new environment and run the import:

.Example: audit import
[source,bash]
----
ninja.sh importAudit -i audit-export.xml.zip -z
----

Check also the xref:/midpoint/reference/repository/native-audit/#audit-migration-from-other-database[migration guide for the Native audit].

== Other scenarios

=== Administrator unlock

Ninja does not provide unlock or password reset operations explicitly.
Normally administrator can do this via GUI.
It may happen that administrator locks out itself from the system, in which case we recommend to reinitialize the object:

.Administrator object refresh from the initial object
[source,bash]
----
ninja.sh import --input <midpoint>/doc/config/initial-objects/050-user-administrator.xml --overwrite
----

Now, this is rather a drastic measure - let's modify the existing user instead.
First we need to export it.

[NOTE]
If you want to use Ninja for midPoint running with H2 database (which is sensible only for testing), the application must be stopped first.
Other databases have dedicated servers and Ninja can be used while midPoint is running.

.Exporting administrator user by OID
[source,bash]
----
ninja.sh export --oid 00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000002 --output admin.xml
----

Alternatively, you can use type option and filter to specify name
(don't forget the `--overwrite` option, if the file already exists):

.Exporting user by name
[source,bash]
----
ninja.sh export --type user --filter '% name = "administrator"' --output admin.xml
----

Now is the time to carefully edit the object XML.
If a single object is in the XML (which is our case), you can remove the `<objects>` wrapper element.
This may actually help with code completion if xref:/midpoint/tools/studio/[midPoint Studio] is used.

Typical fixes to shape up the uncooperative user object are:

* Remove `administrativeStatus` and `effectiveStatus` elements from the top-level `activation`
element (be sure not to modify `activation` under `assignments` inadvertently).
This should fix any problems with disabled user.
* If you forgot the password, change the whole content of the `credentials/password/value` element
to this snippet (must be inside the `value` element):
+
[source,xml]
----
<t:clearValue>asdf1234</t:clearValue>
----

After the fixes, it's time to push the object back into the repository.
Import process can handle both plain object or objects inside `<object>` container.
Use the following command:

.Importing the fixed user object
[source,bash]
----
ninja.sh import --input admin.xml --overwrite
----

Now you should enjoy easy administrator login.
Of course, this works for any user object, but using the GUI with working administrator is the way to go.

[IMPORTANT]
If you changed the password in this way, don't forget to change it immediately to something more solid.
This will also properly encrypt it in the object representation, as expected.

== Full help

.Full help
[source]
----
$ java -jar target/ninja.jar -h
Usage: java [-Dloader.path=<jdbc_driver_jar_path>] -jar ninja.jar [options] [command] [command options]
  Options:
    -c, --charset
      Charset used for input/output
      Default: utf-8
    -h, --help
      Print this help
    -m, --midpoint-home
      Path to MidPoint home folder. If relative path is specified, it will be translated to absolute path.
    --offline
      Do not use repository (local nor via webservice)
      Default: false
    -p, --password
      Password for rest/jdbc connection
    -P, --password-ask
      Please write rest/jdbc connection password
    -s, --silent
      No output at all
      Default: false
    -U, --url
      URL to MidPoint model webservice endpoint or JDBC URL to database. If '-m' option is used URL will be
      used to connect to JDBC database. If '-m' is not specified then this parameter is used as MidPoint REST
      URL endpoint.
    -u, --username
      Username for rest/jdbc connection
    -v, --verbose
      Verbose output
      Default: false
    -V, --version
      Version and build description
      Default: false
  Commands:
    import      Imports objects into MidPoint
      Usage: import [options]
        Options:
          -e, --allowUnencryptedValues
            Allow unencrypted values
            Default: false
          -f, --filter
            Value of object filter used to search objects. If you start the filter with the letter @, the
            rest should be a filename. Start the filter with % to use Axiom query language.
          -i, --input
            Input file for import
          -l, --multi-thread
            How many threads to use for operation.
            Default: 1
          -o, --oid
            Object OID
          -O, --overwrite
            Overwrite input file
            Default: false
          -r, --raw
            Use raw option
            Default: false
          -t, --type
            Object type, case insensitive value, e.g. "user". Do not use "Type" suffix.
            Default: []
          -z, --zip
            Use zip/unzip compression
            Default: false

    export      Exports objects from midPoint
      Usage: export [options]
        Options:
          -f, --filter
            Value of object filter used to search objects. If you start the filter with the letter @, the
            rest should be a filename. Start the filter with % to use Axiom query language.
          -l, --multi-thread
            How many threads to use for operation.
            Default: 1
          -ni, --no-container-ids
            Skips container ids
            Default: false
          -o, --oid
            Object OID
          -O, --output
            Output file for export
          -ow, --overwrite
            Overwrite output file
            Default: false
          -r, --raw
            Use raw option
            Default: false
          -t, --type
            Object type, case insensitive value, e.g. "user". Do not use "Type" suffix.
            Default: []
          -z, --zip
            Use zip/unzip compression
            Default: false

    delete      delete
      Usage: delete [options]
        Options:
          -a, --ask
            Ask before object deletion
            Default: false
          -f, --filter
            Value of object filter used to search objects. If you start the filter with the letter @, the
            rest should be a filename. Start the filter with % to use Axiom query language.
          -F, --force
            Force option
            Default: false
          -o, --oid
            Object OID
          -r, --raw
            Raw option
            Default: false
          -t, --type
            Object type, case insensitive value, e.g. "user". Do not use "Type" suffix.
            Possible Values: [CONNECTOR, CONNECTOR_HOST, GENERIC_OBJECT, RESOURCE, USER, OBJECT_TEMPLATE, SYSTEM_CONFIGURATION, TASK, SHADOW, ROLE, PASSWORD_POLICY, NODE, FORM, ORG, ABSTRACT_ROLE, FOCUS_TYPE, ASSIGNMENT_HOLDER_TYPE, REPORT, REPORT_DATA, SECURITY_POLICY, LOOKUP_TABLE, ACCESS_CERTIFICATION_DEFINITION, ACCESS_CERTIFICATION_CAMPAIGN, SEQUENCE, SERVICE, CASE, FUNCTION_LIBRARY, OBJECT_COLLECTION, ARCHETYPE, DASHBOARD, OBJECT]

    count      Count objects in midPoint repository
      Usage: count [options]
        Options:
          -f, --filter
            Value of object filter used to search objects. If you start the filter with the letter @, the
            rest should be a filename. Start the filter with % to use Axiom query language.
          -t, --type
            Object type, case insensitive value, e.g. "user". Do not use "Type" suffix.
            Default: []

    verify      Verify objects in midPoint repository
      Usage: verify [options]
        Options:
          -f, --filter
            Value of object filter used to search objects. If you start the filter with the letter @, the
            rest should be a filename. Start the filter with % to use Axiom query language.
          -l, --multi-thread
            How many threads to use for operation.
            Default: 1
          -ni, --no-container-ids
            Skips container ids
            Default: false
          -o, --oid
            Object OID
          -O, --output
            Output file for export
          -ow, --overwrite
            Overwrite output file
            Default: false
          -r, --raw
            Use raw option
            Default: false
          -t, --type
            Object type, case insensitive value, e.g. "user". Do not use "Type" suffix.
            Default: []
          -w, --warn
            List of displayed warning categories, e.g. deprecated, plannedRemoval, uuid
          -z, --zip
            Use zip/unzip compression
            Default: false

    keys      List keys from keystore
      Usage: keys [options]
        Options:
          -k, --key-password
            Key password
          -K
            Please write key password

    info      Shows information about repository for the provided midPoint home
      Usage: info

    importAudit      Imports audit records into MidPoint
      Usage: importAudit [options]
        Options:
          -f, --filter
            Value of object filter used to search objects. If you start the filter with the letter @, the
            rest should be a filename. Start the filter with % to use Axiom query language.
          -i, --input
            Input file for import
          -l, --multi-thread
            How many threads to use for operation.
            Default: 1
          -O, --overwrite
            Overwrite input file
            Default: false
          -z, --zip
            Use zip/unzip compression
            Default: false

    exportAudit      Exports audit records from MidPoint
      Usage: exportAudit [options]
        Options:
          -f, --filter
            Value of object filter used to search objects. If you start the filter with the letter @, the
            rest should be a filename. Start the filter with % to use Axiom query language.
          -l, --multi-thread
            How many threads to use for operation.
            Default: 1
          -O, --output
            Output file for export
          -ow, --overwrite
            Overwrite output file
            Default: false
          -z, --zip
            Use zip/unzip compression
            Default: false

    trace      Edit trace file
      Usage: trace [options]
        Options:
          --input
            Input trace file
          --keep
            Operation results to be kept (with their children). Asterisk is allowed. All above them will be
            removed.
          --kill
            Operation results to be removed (with their children). Asterisk is allowed.
          --output
            Output trace file (default is "output.zip")
          --print-stat
            Print statistics
            Default: false
          --print-stat-extra
            Print extra statistics i.e. the node size. Takes longer time.
            Default: false
----
