docs/security/security-policy/index.adoc, before:

= Security Policy Configuration
:page-nav-title: Security Policy
:page-wiki-name: Security Policy Configuration
:page-wiki-id: 24085527
:page-wiki-metadata-create-user: semancik
:page-wiki-metadata-create-date: 2017-03-16T16:49:07.028+01:00
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-user: rpudil
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-date: 2020-05-12T12:11:56.222+02:00
:page-upkeep-status: yellow
:page-toc: top

Security policy object contains definition of a security-related setting for an midPoint instance.
It refers to password policies and contains configuration for different types of credentials (security questions, nonce, password).
It is also used to define password resets, self-service registration and so on.

Following is the example of complex Security Policy.

.Security Policy sample
[source,xml]
----
<securityPolicy oid="6df80eb2-0a63-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e1" xmlns='http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3'>
    <name>Security Policy</name>
    <authentication>
        <mailAuthentication>
               <name>confirmationLink</name>
            <displayName>Additional mail authentication</displayName>
            <mailNonce>mailNonce</mailNonce>
        </mailAuthentication>
    </authentication>
    <credentials>
        <password>
            <maxAge>P180D</maxAge>
            <lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>3</lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>
            <lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>PT3M</lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>
            <lockoutDuration>PT15M</lockoutDuration>
            <valuePolicyRef oid="6df08ed7-0b13-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e1" type="ValuePolicyType"/>
        </password>
        <nonce>
            <maxAge>PT10M</maxAge>
            <lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>3</lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>
            <lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>PT3M</lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>
            <lockoutDuration>PT15M</lockoutDuration>
            <valuePolicyRef oid="6df08ed7-0b13-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e2" type="ValuePolicyType"/>
        </nonce>
        <securityQuestions>
            <maxAge>P90D</maxAge>
            <lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>3</lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>
            <lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>PT3M</lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>
            <lockoutDuration>PT15M</lockoutDuration>
            <valuePolicyRef oid="6df08ed7-0b13-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e3" type="ValuePolicyType"/>
            <questionNumber>1</questionNumber>
            <question>
                <identifier>http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/question-2#q001</identifier>
                <enabled>true</enabled>
                <questionText>How much wood would a woodchuck chuck if woodchuck could chuck wood?</questionText>
            </question>
            <question>
                <identifier>http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/question-2#q002</identifier>
                <questionText>What is your mother's best friend's uncle's grandaughter's dog's mother maiden name?</questionText>
            </question>
            <question>
                <identifier>http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/question-2#q003</identifier>
                <enabled>true</enabled>
                <questionText>What's your favorite color?</questionText>
            </question>
            <question>
                <identifier>http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/question-2#q004</identifier>
                <enabled>false</enabled>
                <questionText>What's your favorite film?</questionText>
            </question>
        </securityQuestions>
    </credentials>
    <registration>
      <selfRegistration>
         <name>selfRegistration</name>
         <initialLifecycleState>proposed</initialLifecycleState>
         <displayName>Self Registration</displayName>
         <additionalAuthenticationName>confirmationLink</additionalAuthenticationName>
         <defaultRole xmlns:org="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/org-3"
                      oid="00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000008"
                      relation="org:default"
                      type="c:RoleType"/>
      </selfRegistration>
   </registration>
   <credentialsReset>
      <mailReset>
         <name>Reset password using mail</name>
         <additionalAuthenticationName>confirmationLink</additionalAuthenticationName>
      </mailReset>
   </credentialsReset>
</securityPolicy>
----


== Configuring credentials

Midpoint supports different types of credentials - password, nonce, security questions.
Nonce and security questions are midPoint specific types of credentials which are mainly used for reset password, self-registration or similar use cases related to the midPoint.
They are stored in the midPoint directory but they are not propagated to connected systems.
Password (based on the configuration) is (usually) stored in midPoint local repository, but it is also propagated to the connected resources (based on the configuration again).
For all credential types supported by midPoint it is possible to set policies for validation, e.g if the nonce generated for password reset is still valid, if there is enough security question-answer couples, if the password satisfies password policy and so on.
Following table contains properties which can be set for all types of credentials.

[%autowidth]
|===
| Property | Example | Description

| maxAge
| P30D
| To enforce maximum lifetime of the credentials.
E.g. password has to be changed every 30 days


| lockoutMaxFailedAttempts
| 3
| To enforce lockout of the account after _n_ failed attempts to login


| lockoutDuration
| PT15M
| To provide automatic unlock of the account after some time


| valuePolicyRef
| oid="6df08ed7-0b13-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e1"
| Reference to the value policy used to validate characters used in password


|===


=== Configuring password related policies

.Credentials - Password
[source,xml]
----
<securityPolicy oid="6df80eb2-0a63-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e1" xmlns='http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3'>
    <name>Security Policy</name>
    ...
    <credentials>
        <password>
            <maxAge>P180D</maxAge>
            <lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>3</lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>
            <lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>PT3M</lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>
            <lockoutDuration>PT15M</lockoutDuration>
            <valuePolicyRef oid="6df08ed7-0b13-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e1" type="ValuePolicyType"/>
        </password>
    ....
    </credentials>
    ...
</securityPolicy>
----


=== Configuring nonce related policies

.Credentials - Nonce
[source,xml]
----
<securityPolicy oid="6df80eb2-0a63-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e1" xmlns='http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3'>
    ...
    <credentials>
        ...
        <nonce>
            <maxAge>PT10M</maxAge>
            <lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>3</lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>
            <lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>PT3M</lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>
            <lockoutDuration>PT15M</lockoutDuration>
            <valuePolicyRef oid="6df08ed7-0b13-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e2" type="ValuePolicyType"/>
        </nonce>
        ...
    </credentials>
    ...
</securityPolicy>
----


=== Configuring security questions related policies

.Credentials - Security questions
[source,xml]
----
<securityPolicy oid="6df80eb2-0a63-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e1" xmlns='http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3'>
    <name>Security Policy</name>
    ...
    <credentials>
        ...
        <securityQuestions>
            <maxAge>P90D</maxAge>
            <lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>3</lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>
            <lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>PT3M</lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>
            <lockoutDuration>PT15M</lockoutDuration>
            <valuePolicyRef oid="6df08ed7-0b13-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e3" type="ValuePolicyType"/>
            <questionNumber>1</questionNumber>
            <question>
                <identifier>http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/question-2#q001</identifier>
                <enabled>true</enabled>
                <questionText>How much wood would a woodchuck chuck if woodchuck could chuck wood?</questionText>
            </question>
            <question>
                <identifier>http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/question-2#q002</identifier>
                <questionText>What is your mother's best friend's uncle's grandaughter's dog's mother maiden name?</questionText>
            </question>
            <question>
                <identifier>http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/question-2#q003</identifier>
                <enabled>true</enabled>
                <questionText>What's your favorite color?</questionText>
            </question>
            <question>
                <identifier>http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/question-2#q004</identifier>
                <enabled>false</enabled>
                <questionText>What's your favorite film?</questionText>
            </question>
        </securityQuestions>
    </credentials>
    ...
</securityPolicy>
----


== Referencing Security Policy

The security policy object is usually referenced from xref:/midpoint/reference/concepts/system-configuration-object/[System Configuration Object]:

[source,xml]
----
<systemConfiguration>
    ...
    <globalSecurityPolicyRef oid="6df80eb2-0a63-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e1"/>
    ...
</systemConfiguration>
----

Security policy referenced in this way is considered to be a global security policy.
It defines the setting for the whole system.
Since midPoint 3.6 the security policy may also be specified for each xref:/midpoint/reference/org/organizational-structure/[organizational unit].


== See Also

* xref:/midpoint/reference/security/credentials/password-related-configuration/[Password-Related Configuration]

* xref:/midpoint/reference/security/credentials/password-policy/[Password Policy]

Commit message:

documentation update for security policies merging

docs/security/security-policy/index.adoc, after:

= Security Policy Configuration
:page-nav-title: Security Policy
:page-wiki-name: Security Policy Configuration
:page-wiki-id: 24085527
:page-wiki-metadata-create-user: semancik
:page-wiki-metadata-create-date: 2017-03-16T16:49:07.028+01:00
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-user: rpudil
:page-wiki-metadata-modify-date: 2020-05-12T12:11:56.222+02:00
:page-upkeep-status: yellow
:page-toc: top

Security policy object contains definition of a security-related setting for an midPoint instance.
It refers to password policies and contains configuration for different types of credentials (security questions, nonce, password).
It is also used to define password resets, self-service registration and so on.

Starting from 4.7 version there is a possibility to merge security policies. This mechanism allows to apply different security policies for different groups of user. The security policy which should be applied to the user (or to the group of the users) can be defined in several places in midPoint: in global security policy (assigned in system configuration), in the organization to which the user belongs, in the structural archetype (or its super-structural-archetypes) which is assigned to the user. All security policies which are defined in the specified objects are merged into one with the next order: "closer" to the user security policies have higher priority. This means the security policy from the user's archetype can extend/override a security policy from super archetype, super archetype security policy can extend/override a security policy from organization, a security policy from the organization can extend/override a global security policy.

For example, let's say first step of the authentication sequence for user's password reset is defined in the global security policy, most probably it should be an authentication module which identifies the user. All users who are members of the University organizational unit should be also authenticated with mail nonce module therefore this module should be defined in the security policy assigned to the University organization. But as a third authentication step the user's attribute should be verified, besides the attribute differs for Teachers (let's say Teacher ID) and Students (Student ID) groups. In that case there will be a security policy defined for Teachers archetype and another one for Students archetype, each of these security policies defines its own authentication module. As a result a user who is a member of the University organization and has Students archetype should be authenticated with the module from global security policy, then with the module defined in the organizational security policy, and then from archetype security policy. The full authentication sequence for the user is merged from different security policies. Some more examples and explanation you can find by the link xref:/midpoint/reference/security/credentials/password-reset/index.adoc[Password Reset Configuration].

Following is the example of complex Security Policy.

.Security Policy sample
[source,xml]
----
<securityPolicy oid="6df80eb2-0a63-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e1" xmlns='http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3'>
    <name>Security Policy</name>
    <authentication>
        <mailAuthentication>
               <name>confirmationLink</name>
            <displayName>Additional mail authentication</displayName>
            <mailNonce>mailNonce</mailNonce>
        </mailAuthentication>
    </authentication>
    <credentials>
        <password>
            <maxAge>P180D</maxAge>
            <lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>3</lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>
            <lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>PT3M</lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>
            <lockoutDuration>PT15M</lockoutDuration>
            <valuePolicyRef oid="6df08ed7-0b13-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e1" type="ValuePolicyType"/>
        </password>
        <nonce>
            <maxAge>PT10M</maxAge>
            <lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>3</lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>
            <lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>PT3M</lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>
            <lockoutDuration>PT15M</lockoutDuration>
            <valuePolicyRef oid="6df08ed7-0b13-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e2" type="ValuePolicyType"/>
        </nonce>
        <securityQuestions>
            <maxAge>P90D</maxAge>
            <lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>3</lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>
            <lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>PT3M</lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>
            <lockoutDuration>PT15M</lockoutDuration>
            <valuePolicyRef oid="6df08ed7-0b13-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e3" type="ValuePolicyType"/>
            <questionNumber>1</questionNumber>
            <question>
                <identifier>http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/question-2#q001</identifier>
                <enabled>true</enabled>
                <questionText>How much wood would a woodchuck chuck if woodchuck could chuck wood?</questionText>
            </question>
            <question>
                <identifier>http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/question-2#q002</identifier>
                <questionText>What is your mother's best friend's uncle's grandaughter's dog's mother maiden name?</questionText>
            </question>
            <question>
                <identifier>http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/question-2#q003</identifier>
                <enabled>true</enabled>
                <questionText>What's your favorite color?</questionText>
            </question>
            <question>
                <identifier>http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/question-2#q004</identifier>
                <enabled>false</enabled>
                <questionText>What's your favorite film?</questionText>
            </question>
        </securityQuestions>
    </credentials>
    <registration>
      <selfRegistration>
         <name>selfRegistration</name>
         <initialLifecycleState>proposed</initialLifecycleState>
         <displayName>Self Registration</displayName>
         <additionalAuthenticationName>confirmationLink</additionalAuthenticationName>
         <defaultRole xmlns:org="http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/org-3"
                      oid="00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000008"
                      relation="org:default"
                      type="c:RoleType"/>
      </selfRegistration>
   </registration>
   <credentialsReset>
      <mailReset>
         <name>Reset password using mail</name>
         <additionalAuthenticationName>confirmationLink</additionalAuthenticationName>
      </mailReset>
   </credentialsReset>
</securityPolicy>
----


== Configuring credentials

Midpoint supports different types of credentials - password, nonce, security questions.
Nonce and security questions are midPoint specific types of credentials which are mainly used for reset password, self-registration or similar use cases related to the midPoint.
They are stored in the midPoint directory but they are not propagated to connected systems.
Password (based on the configuration) is (usually) stored in midPoint local repository, but it is also propagated to the connected resources (based on the configuration again).
For all credential types supported by midPoint it is possible to set policies for validation, e.g if the nonce generated for password reset is still valid, if there is enough security question-answer couples, if the password satisfies password policy and so on.
Following table contains properties which can be set for all types of credentials.

[%autowidth]
|===
| Property | Example | Description

| maxAge
| P30D
| To enforce maximum lifetime of the credentials.
E.g. password has to be changed every 30 days


| lockoutMaxFailedAttempts
| 3
| To enforce lockout of the account after _n_ failed attempts to login


| lockoutDuration
| PT15M
| To provide automatic unlock of the account after some time


| valuePolicyRef
| oid="6df08ed7-0b13-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e1"
| Reference to the value policy used to validate characters used in password


|===


=== Configuring password related policies

.Credentials - Password
[source,xml]
----
<securityPolicy oid="6df80eb2-0a63-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e1" xmlns='http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3'>
    <name>Security Policy</name>
    ...
    <credentials>
        <password>
            <maxAge>P180D</maxAge>
            <lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>3</lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>
            <lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>PT3M</lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>
            <lockoutDuration>PT15M</lockoutDuration>
            <valuePolicyRef oid="6df08ed7-0b13-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e1" type="ValuePolicyType"/>
        </password>
    ....
    </credentials>
    ...
</securityPolicy>
----


=== Configuring nonce related policies

.Credentials - Nonce
[source,xml]
----
<securityPolicy oid="6df80eb2-0a63-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e1" xmlns='http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3'>
    ...
    <credentials>
        ...
        <nonce>
            <maxAge>PT10M</maxAge>
            <lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>3</lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>
            <lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>PT3M</lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>
            <lockoutDuration>PT15M</lockoutDuration>
            <valuePolicyRef oid="6df08ed7-0b13-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e2" type="ValuePolicyType"/>
        </nonce>
        ...
    </credentials>
    ...
</securityPolicy>
----


=== Configuring security questions related policies

.Credentials - Security questions
[source,xml]
----
<securityPolicy oid="6df80eb2-0a63-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e1" xmlns='http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/common/common-3'>
    <name>Security Policy</name>
    ...
    <credentials>
        ...
        <securityQuestions>
            <maxAge>P90D</maxAge>
            <lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>3</lockoutMaxFailedAttempts>
            <lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>PT3M</lockoutFailedAttemptsDuration>
            <lockoutDuration>PT15M</lockoutDuration>
            <valuePolicyRef oid="6df08ed7-0b13-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e3" type="ValuePolicyType"/>
            <questionNumber>1</questionNumber>
            <question>
                <identifier>http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/question-2#q001</identifier>
                <enabled>true</enabled>
                <questionText>How much wood would a woodchuck chuck if woodchuck could chuck wood?</questionText>
            </question>
            <question>
                <identifier>http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/question-2#q002</identifier>
                <questionText>What is your mother's best friend's uncle's grandaughter's dog's mother maiden name?</questionText>
            </question>
            <question>
                <identifier>http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/question-2#q003</identifier>
                <enabled>true</enabled>
                <questionText>What's your favorite color?</questionText>
            </question>
            <question>
                <identifier>http://midpoint.evolveum.com/xml/ns/public/security/question-2#q004</identifier>
                <enabled>false</enabled>
                <questionText>What's your favorite film?</questionText>
            </question>
        </securityQuestions>
    </credentials>
    ...
</securityPolicy>
----


== Referencing Security Policy

The security policy object is usually referenced from xref:/midpoint/reference/concepts/system-configuration-object/[System Configuration Object]:

[source,xml]
----
<systemConfiguration>
    ...
    <globalSecurityPolicyRef oid="6df80eb2-0a63-11e7-8ced-af0e536f33e1"/>
    ...
</systemConfiguration>
----

Security policy referenced in this way is considered to be a global security policy.
It defines the setting for the whole system.
Since midPoint 3.6 the security policy may also be specified for each xref:/midpoint/reference/org/organizational-structure/[organizational unit].


== See Also

* xref:/midpoint/reference/security/credentials/password-related-configuration/[Password-Related Configuration]

* xref:/midpoint/reference/security/credentials/password-policy/[Password Policy]
