docs/admin-gui/role-wizard/index.adoc, before:

= Resource wizard
:page-toc: top
:page-since: "4.7"

Role wizard is available from midPoint version 4.6.

Some wizard panels are configurable, for more information see xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/admin-gui-config/#wizard-panels[Wizard panels].

New UI takes form of some panels with choice for specific parts of resource configuration. Specific part of configuration is represented by a wizard with steps.

Midpoint support role wizard only for _Application role_ and _Business role_.

== Application role wizard
In the role wizard for the application role, we can select _Application_, set the new role's basic attributes, add users to the new role, and create a inducement for resource with associations and mappings.

We can skip the application selection and add a inducement in the step later.

.Application catalog
image::arw-step-1-select-application.png[Application catalog,100%]

.Basic attributes of role
image::arw-step-1-basic.png[Basic attributes of role,100%]

The role is created after submitting the attributes. Next, we see titles with additional possibilities.

image::arw-step-2-tiles.png[Configuration possibilities,100%]

We can add governance users, member users, create a inducement for a resource or view the currently created role.

{empty} +
Members panels:
[%autowidth, cols="a,a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===
| image::arw-step-3-governance.png[link=arw-step-3-governance.png, 100%, title=Panel for adding governance user]
| image::arw-step-3-member.png[link=arw-step-3-member.png, 100%, title=Panel for adding user as member]
|===

{empty} +
Configuration provisioning:

[%autowidth, cols="1a,1a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===
| image::arw-step-4-select-resource.png[link=arw-step-4-select-resource.png, 100%, title=Selecting of resource]
| image::arw-step-4-select-object-type.png[link=arw-step-4-select-object-type.png,100%, title=Selecting of resource object type]

| image::arw-step-4-selecting-of-association.png[link=arw-step-4-selecting-of-association.png, 100%, title=Selecting of associations]
| image::arw-step-4-configuration-of-outbound-mappings.png[link=arw-step-4-configuration-of-outbound-mappings.png, 100%, title=Configuration of outbound mappings]
|===

== Business role wizard
In the role wizard for the business role, we can set the new role's basic attributes,select _Application roles_ and add users to the new role.

.Basic attributes of role
image::brw-step-1-basic.png[Basic attributes of role,100%]

We need to select at least one application role.

.Application role catalog
image::brw-step-1-select-application-role.png[Application role catalog,100%]

== Wizard for existing role

If we want to create a new incentive for a resource, only then we can view wizard for the provisioning configuration.

.Role detail
image::role-details.png[Role detail, 100%]

Commit message:

modifying doc for role wizard

docs/admin-gui/role-wizard/index.adoc, after:

= Resource wizard
:page-toc: top
:page-since: "4.7"

Role wizard is available from midPoint version 4.6.

Some wizard panels are configurable, for more information see xref:/midpoint/reference/admin-gui/admin-gui-config/#wizard-panels[Wizard panels].

New UI takes form of some panels with choice for specific parts of resource configuration. Specific part of configuration is represented by a wizard with steps.

Midpoint support role wizard only for _Application role_ and _Business role_.

== Application role wizard
In the role wizard for the application role, we can select _Application_, set the new role's basic attributes, add users to the new role, and create a inducement for resource with associations and mappings.

We can skip the application selection and add a inducement in the step later.

.Application catalog
image::arw-step-1-select-application.png[Application catalog,100%]

.Basic attributes of role
image::arw-step-1-basic.png[Basic attributes of role,100%]

The role is created after submitting the attributes. Next, we see titles with additional possibilities.

image::arw-step-2-tiles.png[Configuration possibilities,100%]

We can add governance users, member users, create a inducement for a resource or view the currently created role.

{empty} +
Members panels:
[%autowidth, cols="a,a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===
| image::arw-step-3-governance.png[link=arw-step-3-governance.png, 100%, title=Panel for adding governance user]
| image::arw-step-3-member.png[link=arw-step-3-member.png, 100%, title=Panel for adding user as member]
|===

{empty} +
Configuration provisioning:

[%autowidth, cols="1a,1a", frame=none, grid=none, role=center]
|===
| image::arw-step-4-select-resource.png[link=arw-step-4-select-resource.png, 100%, title=Selecting of resource]
| image::arw-step-4-select-object-type.png[link=arw-step-4-select-object-type.png,100%, title=Selecting of resource object type]

| image::arw-step-4-selecting-of-association.png[link=arw-step-4-selecting-of-association.png, 100%, title=Selecting of associations]
| image::arw-step-4-configuration-of-outbound-mappings.png[link=arw-step-4-configuration-of-outbound-mappings.png, 100%, title=Configuration of outbound mappings]
|===

== Business role wizard
In the role wizard for the business role, we can set the new role's basic attributes,select _Application roles_ and add users to the new role.

.Basic attributes of role
image::brw-step-1-basic.png[Basic attributes of role,100%]

We need to select at least one application role.

.Application role catalog
image::brw-step-1-select-application-role.png[Application role catalog,100%]

Adding users is done through the same panels as in the application role wizard.

== Wizard for existing role

If we want to create a new incentive for a resource, only then we can view wizard for the provisioning configuration.

.Role detail
image::role-details.png[Role detail, 100%]
